
Transcriber's Note:

When italics were used in the original book, the corresponding text has
been surrounded by _underscores_. Text printed in blackletter has been
surrounded by #pound signs#. Superscripts have been indicated by
preceding the superscripted letters with ^. When more than one
character in a row is superscripted, the letters have been surrounded
with {}. Some corrections have been made to the text. These are listed
in a second transcriber's note at the end of the book.

[Illustration:

  _His Royal Highness GEORGE AUGUSTUS
  Prince of Wales, &c. And Knight of the
  most Noble Order of the Garter.


  M. V^{dr}. Gucht Scul._
]




                                  THE

                                HISTORY

                           Of the most NOBLE

                         _Order of the GARTER_:

       And the several ORDERS of _Knighthood_ extant in _EUROPE_.


                               Containing

I. The Antiquity of the Town, Castle, Chapel, and College of _Windsor_;
  with their several _Officers_: The Foundation of the _ORDER_ by King
  _EDWARD_ III. The Statutes and Annals at large, as they have been
  altered and amended.

II. The HABITS, ENSIGNS, and OFFICERS of the _ORDER_. The Ceremonies of
  Election, Investiture, and Instalment of Knights: The manner of their
  Feasts; and the Duties and Fees payable on these Occasions. Some
  Account of the _Founders_, with an exact List of all that have been
  installed since the Institution, and their several Coats of Arms
  emblazon’d.

_Written at the Command of King_ Charles II. _By_ ELIAS ASHMOLE, _Esq;_
  Windsor _Herald. Now compared with the Author’s Corrections in his
  Library at_ Oxford, _faithfully digested, and continued down to the
  present Time_.

              The Whole illustrated with proper Sculptures.

_LONDON_: Printed for _A. Bell_ in _Cornhill_, _E. Curll_, _J.
  Pemberton_, and _A. Collins_ in _Fleet-street_; _W. Taylor_ and _J.
  Baker_ in _Pater-Noster-Row_, 1715.

                          Price 7 _s._ 6 _d._




                                 TO HIS

                             ROYAL HIGHNESS

                             GEORGE-AUGUST,

                        _Prince of_ WALES, _&c._

_KNIGHT_ and _COMPANION_ of the _MOST NOBLE ORDER_ of the _GARTER_.


PARDON me, Mighty Prince, that in the Crowd of Your Joyful and Devoted
_Britons_, one of an obscure Fame presumes to lay his _Humble Offering_
at Your Feet.

IT is the _History_ of the _MOST NOBLE ORDER of the GARTER_; which,
from its first Institution, has been constantly worn by Persons of the
highest Birth, and most illustrious Merit.

IF the _Stile_ and _Manner_, in which it is treated, were
proportionable to the Dignity of the Subject, there would need no
Apology for this Dedication. For to whom, next to the _Great Sovereign_
of the _Garter_, whose true _Heir_ You are, in all manner of _Virtue_
and _Honour_, could this Treatise have recourse for Protection, but to
Your Royal Highness, who are the Premier _Knight of this Most Noble
Order_, and the standing _Grace_ and _Ornament_ of it.

BUT far above all particular _Views_, are the unspeakable Blessings
derived to these Kingdoms, by the SUCCESSION of Your Illustrious Royal
_House_: Every _Briton_ seems new Born, and to have borrow’d fresh
influence from its Glorious Presence.

THE Godlike Virtues of Your Royal Father, are not to be excelled; and
should we venture to express an Equality, it can only be the Appearance
of Your Royal Highness’s imitating so Great a Pattern.

AS He is Wise and Good beyond Praise, so has He a Title to the Hearts
of His People beyond Question; which stands Confirmed by the highest
Instances of Divine Providence, as well as the incontestible
Authorities of Temporal Laws: On these Foundations, what glorious
Prospects may we not Build of future Happiness?

IT were easy to dwell on this Subject, were it not wasting Moments of
much more concern to Your Royal Highness, than what I am able to
Express.

MAY Your Royal Highness long Live to Adorn this _MOST NOBLE ORDER_, and
to support the Crown, by a bountiful and flourishing issue, that there
may never want one of Your Royal Line to sit on the Throne of
_Great-Britain_,

 _Is the Ardent Prayer of,
  ILLUSTRIOUS SIR!_

   _Your Royal Highness’s
    Most Faithful,
     Most Obedient,
      and Humbly Devoted Servant._




                                  THE

                                PREFACE


_Those who are acquainted with Mr._ Ashmole’_s_ History of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, _will easily satisfy themselves; that no
Pains or Industry was wanting to Perfect and Complete so Voluminous a
Work: He had the Encouragement of a very gracious Prince, and the use
of publick Records, more particularly the several Books of the_ Order,
_with the Assistance of several MSS wrote by the Officers of Arms, who
bore Part in the Ceremonies, or went on Embassies to Stranger Kings,
Princes_, &c. _and by their constant Observations, were familiarly
versed in all its Laws and Customs_.

_These were very great helps to him, and it must be confessed his own
elaborate Study had not less owing to it. There is nothing that has
relation to this most_ Noble Order, _which he has not touched on; and
indeed it is a Work so very copious, that he does himself acknowledge
he has inserted some things of little importance; which he desires may
be considered to be done, to gratify some few who have a more immediate
concern therein_.

_The Reader will in this Treatise find little else omitted: A very
painful and exact Abridgment has been made, many Corrections of the
Author’s, which he saw before his Death, and left among his other Books
in his Library at_ Oxford, _are here carefully altered; some Additions
are made, a List continued, of the several_ Knights-Companions, _as
well as Officers of the_ Order, _for above forty Years; and the Coats
of Arms of abundance of the_ Knights-Companions _visibly corrected from
good Authorities; and every distinct Chapter treated of at large; so
that this Work has not been compleated but at great Labour as well as
Expence, which could not have been supported, but for the Encouragement
some of the_ Knights-Companions _of the_ most Noble Order _were pleased
to give it; as well in their Subscriptions, as in the good Opinion they
seemed to Express of the Design_.




[Illustration]




                                  THE

                                HISTORY

                                 OF THE

                            Most Noble ORDER

                                 OF THE

                                GARTER.


IT was, undoubtedly, a good Sentiment in the first Collector of this
Learned Work, to introduce, as well as a Discourse of _Knighthood_ in
general, a Treatise of all the several _Orders_ that have prevail’d in
other Parts of the World; for these in their Rise and Institutions,
having a relative Sense to the particular Subject he was to illustrate,
seemed to afford him a very good Opportunity of doing it, by building
on so convenient a Foundation.

I shall therefore, (tho’ much more confin’d to brevity) follow the same
Method, making it serve as a proper Introduction; there being many
Things in the voluminous Original, which I conceive may with less
Inconveniency be dispenc’d with.

IT was a constant Maxim in all well-regulated Governments, to give a
just Encouragement to Merit, and this by proportioning Rewards to the
Service done; for Merit must be suppos’d to consist in the Performance
of some Virtuous or Heroick Action, directed for the publick Good: And
as Vertue is either Military or Civil, so the Distribution of Rewards
is different; either by bestowing Degrees and Titles of Honour, or by
Donations of Wealth; so that in either Construction, Vertue may have
its proper and suitable Reward.

BUT the proper Reward of Military _Vertue_, is Honour: (to which
distinct Head this Work is confin’d.) Honour, which _Aristotle_ calls
the _Greatest of exteriour Goods_: And being an Object of a nobler
Ambition than the Accumulation of Wealth, is principally the Aim of
that _Vertue_ we understand by _Valour_; which springs from more
generous Spirits, and hath been the constant Foundation of raising Men
to the highest Eminence of Glory, and superiour Dignity.

BUT that Fame might not lose itself in an unbounded Notion, it was at
length thought fit to reduce Honour into Form and Order, by investing
the Person meriting with some particular Title or Appellation of
Excellence, (the Original of all Nobility;) of which Knighthood, as it
hath been accounted the most suitable Reward to the greatest Vertue, so
it hath been esteemed the chief and primary Honour among many Nations.

THE _Romans_ held Honour and Vertue in that Esteem, that they deify’d,
and dedicated Temples to them: They made them so contiguous in their
Situation, that there was no other Passage to that of Honour, but thro’
the Temple of Vertue, mystically admonishing, that Honour was not to be
attained by any other Way.

IN several of the _Roman_ Coins we see Honour and Vertue represented
together in one Reverse, and in one Medal; the Face of Honour so
shadows that of Vertue, that but a little of it appears, _Honour being
the more illustrious of the two; and where we behold any Person
outwardly adorned with it, we are to judge him inwardly endued with
Vertue, inasmuch as Honour is his due, and justly bestowed upon him_.

§. 2. IN tracing the Original of Knighthood, we are not so vain to say,
with the _French_, that S. _Michael_ was the _premier Chevalier_; yet
thus much we may assert, that ’tis near as ancient as Valour and Heroic
Vertue, notwithstanding the Ceremonies and Circumstances of it have
varied according to several Ages and Nations: And therefore, with much
Probability, we may derive the Original of Military Honour from the
_Trojans_ and _Greeks_; among whom, as Knights of great Renown, were
_Hector_, _Troilus_, _Æneas_, _Antenor_, _Agamemnon_, _Menelaus_,
_Peleus_, _Tydeus_, &c. And thus _Homer_ uses the Word ἱππότης, in the
same Sense as _Eques_ was afterwards among the _Latins_.

         Τοῖσι δὲ καὶ μετέειπε γερήνιος ἱππότα Νέστωρ,

         ’Mong whom thus _Nestor_ spake, that honour’d Knight.

§. 3. UPON a more substantial Basis we shall descend to the _Romans_;
among whom, in the very Infancy of their Military Glory, a Society of
Knights was instituted, immediately after their Union with the
_Sabines_. _Romulus_ inrolled _Centuriæ tres Equitum_, three Centuries
of Knights, out of the chiefest Families, whom he appointed to be his
Life-guard, and called them _Celeres_, from their Activity and Dispatch
in Martial Affairs.

_Tarquinius Priscus_ made an Addition to these Centuries; the like did
_Servius Tullius_, who ordained, that those who should succeed in that
Body, should be elected _ex censu_, _viz._ from a considerable and
certain Valuation of their Estates, who had the greatest Cense, and
were of the most Noble Families, says _Dyonys. Halicarn._ And soon
after, the Equestrian Class began to be formed and constituted one of
the three Orders of the Commonwealth, which were thus rank’d, according
to _Livy_: _Senatus, Ordo Equestris & Plebs_; which in the _Roman_
Literal Notes is set down after this Manner: CON. SEN. E. ORD. P. Q. R.
And forasmuch as this Degree is placed between the _Patricians_, or
Senators, and the _Plebeians_, it answers exactly the State of our
Knights between the Nobility and Commonalty: And from this Order, to
the Height of Nobility which resided in the Senators, was the Way
prepared; _Junius Brutus_ being the first who was raised to a Senator
from the Equestrian Order.

IT was a Constitution, as old as _Tiberius_’s Reign, that none should
be admitted, unless Free-born, or a Gentleman for three Generations;
and, indeed, for a long Time none were elected Knights but the best
Sort of Gentlemen, and Persons of Extraction, as was the illustrious
_Mœcenas_.

                  _Atavis regibus ortus eques_, Mart.

who aspired no higher, not out of any Incapacity of attaining greater
Honours, but that he desired them not, says _Paterculus_: Yet at
length, thro’ Corruption of Times, Plebeians and Freedmen being too
frequently received into this Degree (too near a Parallel among the
Knights of this Age) occasion’d their Power to grow less and less,
’till it shrunk to nothing; so that the Places and Offices of Judges
which they before had executed, became conferrable upon the
_Publicans_. And when _Cicero_ was Consul, _anno ab urbe conditi_ 690,
the Equestrian Order stood in need of Re-establishment, whereupon they
were then incorporated into that Commonwealth in the third Degree, all
Acts passing _in the Name of the Senate, the People of_ Rome, _and the
Equestrian Order_.

They often enjoy’d Abroad the Government of several Provinces, whereof
_Egypt_ had this peculiar to itself, that none of the Senators were
admitted, but only those of the Equestrian Order, whose Decrees
_Augustus_ commanded to be had in like Regard, as if the Magistrates of
_Rome_, or Kings, Consuls, or Prætors, had pronounced them.

As a Mark of Eminence, they had the Titles of _Splendidi_ and
_Illustres_ bestowed upon them, and sometimes have been called _most
sacred_ Knights.

AND besides other Privileges, they had Seats with the Senators in the
_Circus Maximus_; and by the _Roscian_ Law, sat next them in the
Theatres: They had likewise a College called _Collegium Equitum_; and
Temples were dedicated to the Goddess _Fortune_, under the Title of
_Equestri Fortunæ_.

HAVING shewn the Dignity and Honours of the Equestrian Order among the
_Romans_, we shall now touch upon the Degrees of Knighthood which have
been Personal, and may be comprehended under the Modern Title of
_Equites Aurati_, or _Milites Simplices_, (as distinguish’d from the
several Orders of Chivalry, instituted in Christendom.) In the
Circumstance of whose Creation we confess, nothing in the _Roman Ordo
Equestris_ hath place, tho’ that might be the Ground and Original of
the Dignity, and one common End in both, namely, the Pursuit of
Military Exploits, and Service in the Wars.

§. 4. OF the Degrees of Knighthood. We shall first of the _Monozons_,
i. e. Knights begirt with the Military Girdle, a Custom devolved to the
_Germans_ and _Gauls_ from ancient Times, and from them to After-Ages.

SIR _Henry Spelman_ notes, _That the late Emperors conferred the
Dignity of Knighthood with the Military Girdle instead of all other
Arms, because that Part more eminent amongst them girdeth, supporteth,
and adorneth the rest_; whence _Selden_ calls this Girding the most
essential part of the Ceremony. Nor do we find among the various
Ceremonies of _Knighthood_ any that have continued so constant in
Practice as the endowing with Girdle and Sword, Ornaments proper to the
Dignity and Marks of _Honour_ and _Vertue_, with which the Statues and
Portraitures of _Knights_, on their Grave-stones have been adorned.

FOR as at this Day _Knights_ are styled _Equites Aurati_, from the
Golden Spurs, heretofore put on at their Creation, so were they more
anciently _Singulo Miletari donati_, in respect, when any one was
_Knighted_, he was not only smitten with the Sword, but invested with
Sword and Belt, yet retain’d at the creating our Knights of the _Bath_,
as the old Formulary thus hath it; #Then shall the King of great
Favour take the Sword, and gird the Esquire therewith.#

Secondly, The _Baccalaurei_ or Knights Batchelors, are to be
consider’d, who are indifferently styled _Chevaliers_, _Milites_,
_Equites Aurati_, and _Knights_. This Degree is truly accounted the
first of all Military Dignity, and the Foundation of all Honours in our
Nation, and is derived from, if not the same with that immediately
preceding. For as the Ceremony of a gentle Touch on the Shoulder with
the flat Side of the Sword hath been since used, instead of girting
with the Sword and Belt, (especially in Times of War, or in Haste) as
an Initiation into the Military Order; so on the contrary, it is not
unusual now-adays, for the Prince, at least _Gladio_, if not _Cingulo
donare_; for he oftentimes bestows the Sword upon the Person he
_Knighteth_.

_Miræus_ gives them the Epithet _Aurati_, from the Privilege of wearing
Gold upon their Swords and Spurs, omitting _Tiraquel_’s fanciful
Distinction between _Miles_ and _Eques Auratus_, who allows the former
to signify a Knight Noble before, and the other to denote one whom we
call a Knight and no Gentleman, or applicable to the _Neapolitan_
Gentlemen, (usually called _Cavalieri_) who are all styled _Equites_,
tho’ they never have attained the Knightly Dignity.

THE third Sort were _Knights Banerets_, who so well deserv’d in the
Wars, that they were afterwards permitted to use _Vexillum quadratum_,
a square Banner, whence they were called _Equites vexillarii_, or
_Chevaliers a Buniere_ from the Dutch _Banerheere_, Lord or Master of
the Banner.

_Camden_ conceives this Title first devis’d by K. _Edward_ 3. in
Recompence of Martial Prowess; a Recital of which Dignity is mention’d
in a Patent 20 _E._ 3. to _John Coupland_, for his Service, in taking
_David_ King of _Scots_ Prisoner. But it was much more ancient with us,
as well as in _France_; and they had particular Robes, and other
Ornaments given them from the Crown, _ad apparatum suum pro militia,
tanquam pro Baneretto, a Rege suscipienda_, &c. _viz._ _ad unum
Tunicam_, &c. after which is set down the particular Robes, and other
Ornaments appointed for his Creation.

TO shew this Dignity yet more ancient, there is the Evidence of a Writ
in K. _Edw._ 3d’s Time, for furnishing _Thomas Bardolf_ with the Robes
of a _Baneret_. It is an Honour esteemed the last among the Greatest,
_viz._ _Nobilitum Majorum_, or the First of the Second Rank; and is
placed in the Middle between the _Barons_ and the other _Knights_; in
which respect the _Baneret_ may be called _Vexillarius minor_, as if he
were the lesser _Banner-Bearer_; to the End he might be so differenced
from the Greater, namely the _Baron_, to whom the Right of bearing a
square Banner doth belong.

BUT there are some remarkable differences between these Knights and
Knights-Batchelors; as in the Occasions and Circumstances of their
Creations, the _Baneret_ being not Created, unless at a Time when the
King’s Standard is erected, and that he bears his own Banner in the
Field; whilst the _Knight-Batchelor_ follows that which is anothers.

THIS farther difference is observed between them, that the
_Knight-Baneret_ had so many Gentlemen his Servants at Command, as
that he could raise a Banner, and make up a Company of Soldiers to
be maintained at his Table, and with his own Pay: But the
_Knight-Batchelor_ had not sufficient for this, and therefore
marched under the Banner of another; and the Wages of the _Baneret_
were double.

NEXT to these, we are to mention Knights of the _Bath_, which is a
Degree that hath the Investiture and Title of Knight, with an
additional Denomination, derived from Part of the Ceremony of his
Creation. It is the general receiv’d Opinion, that our K. _Hen._ 4.
first instituted these Knights, which is justify’d by Sir _John
Froisard_, who says he created 46 of them at his Coronation, chusing
them from such, as were either his Favorites, or had pretensions to it
from their personal Merits, or Services.

BUT if the Ceremonies and Circumstances of their Creation be well
consider’d, it may be inferr’d, that he rather restor’d the ancient way
of making Knights, than Instituted them; and consequently that the
Knights of the _Bath_, are really no other than _Knights-Batchelors_;
that is, such as are created with those Ceremonies, wherewith
_Knights-Batchelors_ were formerly created by Ecclesiasticks: But some
of them having been laid aside, were then brought again into Use, and
made peculiar to this Degree, and since continued to them upon some
solemn and great Occasion.

AT the first View they look like a distinct Order of Knighthood; but
cannot be so accounted, because they have no Statutes assigned them,
nor are in Case of Vacancy, supply’d, (the Essentials of distinct
Orders) nor do they wear their Robes beyond the Time of that Occasion
upon which they were created; as chiefly, the Coronation of a King or
Queen, the Creation of a Prince of _Wales_, Duke of _York_, and the
like; whereas also their Number is uncertain, and always at the
Pleasure of the King.

_Favine_ calls them Knights of the Crown, because, to distinguish them
from Esquires, they wore upon their Left Shoulder an Escutcheon of
Black Silk embroider’d with three Crowns of Gold; but therein he
mistakes, for they never used only a Silk Lace, and the Jewel they wore
was made of Gold, containing three Crowns, with this Motto _Tria juncta
in una_, hanging down under the left Arm at a Carnation Ribbon worn
cross the Body.

THIS leads us to the Degree of Baronets, who seem allied to Knighthood,
by having granted them the Addition of _Sir_ to be set before their
Names: But this gives them not the Dignity of Knighthood; nor can they
properly be styled Knights, until they be actually Knighted.

IT is a Degree erected _Anno_ 9. _Jac._ 1. and the Grant made by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of _England_. It is Hereditary to
them, and the Heirs Male of their Bodies lawfully begotten, for ever;
and by a subsequent Decree of the said King, Precedence is granted to
them before all Banerets, except such as should be made by the King
under his Standard, display’d in an Army Royal in open War, and the
King personally present, and next to and immediately after the younger
Sons of Viscount and Barons.

THE Ground for erecting this Degree was partly Martial; for tho’
themselves were not enjoined personal Service in the Wars, yet each
Baronet was to maintain thirty Foot Soldiers for three Years in
_Ireland_, after the rate of Eight Pence _per_ Day, for the Defence of
that Kingdom, and chiefly to secure the Plantation of _Ulster_.

THEY were at least to be descended from a Grand-father, on the Father’s
Side, that bore Arms, and had a Revenue of 1000 _l. per Ann._ or Lands
of old Rents of equal Value with 1000 _l. per Ann._ of improv’d Lands,
or at least two Parts of three of such Estate in Possession; the other
third in Reversion Expectant upon one Life held only in Jointure.

THE Year after, King _James_ I. added some new Privileges and
Ornaments, _viz._ to Knight those already made that were no Knights;
and the Heirs hereafter of every Baronet should, at the Age of One and
Twenty Years, receive Knighthood; likewise that all Baronets might bear
in Canton, or in an Inescutcheon, the Arms of _Ulster_; and farther, to
have place in the Armies of the King in the Gross, near about the Royal
Standard.

SINCE the Institution of Baronets in _England_, there have been made
divers in _Ireland_ after the like Form: And the Knights of _Nova
Scotia_ in the _West-Indies_ were ordained in Imitation of Baronets in
_England_ by the said King _James_, _A. D._ 1622. for the Planting that
Country by _Scotch_ Colonies, and the Degree made likewise Hereditary.

THESE latter wear an Orange Tawny Ribbon as their Badge, to distinguish
them from other Knights; and it appears, there was an Intention, 1627.
to move his then Majesty, that all Baronets and Knights Bachelors might
wear Ribbons of several Colours, some Badge or Jewel, in such Sort as
did the Knights of the _Bath_, to distinguish the one from the other:
But that Matter dropt.

§. 5. WE shall now observe the Etymology of _Eques_, _Miles_,
_Chevalier_, _Ritter_, and _Sir_. The _Grecians_ had a Title of Honour
equivalent to the Signification of _Eques_ in the _Latin_, from
_Equus_, an Horse, because one Part of the Ceremony, whereby this
Honour became conferred, was the giving of an Horse; or because having
an Horse at the Publick Charge, they received the Stipend of an
Horseman to serve in the Wars, Horses being Symbols of War, _Bello
armantur equi_. It is to be noted, That the Degree of Knighthood in the
Dialects of other Nations hath the same Derivation: For in the
_French_, a Knight is called _Chevalier_; in the _German_, _Ridder_, or
_Ritter_, _q. d._ _Rider_; so the _Gheslagen Ridder_ is interpreted,
_The dubbed Knight_; in the _Italian_, it is _Cavagliero_; in the old
_British_, _Morchog_; concerning which, hear one of _Jeffery Chaucer_’s
Scholars.

                  Eques ab Equo #is said of very right,
                  And# Chevalier #is said of Chevalrie,
                  In which a# Rider #called is a# Knight;
                  Arragoners #done also specifie#
                  Caballiero #through all that Partie,
              Is Name of Worship, and so took his ’ginning
              Of Spurs of Gold, and chiefly Riding#.

AND tho’ the Word _Miles_ signified at first any legally inrolled for
the War, which Inrolment was twofold, _Honoraria_ and _Vulgaris_; yet
upon the Decay of the _Roman_ Empire, upon the Irruption of the
innumerable Forces of the _Alani, Goths, Vandals, &c._ which consisted
in Horse, their Foot was rendred useless. _Miles_ was no longer said of
him that served on Foot in the Wars, but began to be properly spoken of
the Horseman; whence it came into Vogue, That among the Titles of
Nobility, he who had that of _Miles_ bestowed on him, was understood to
be Horseman, or _Eques_, that is, of the Equestrian Dignity.

_Selden_ observes _Miles_ to be equivocal: and that in the old feodal
Laws of the Empire it signify’d a Gentleman, as the Word Gentleman is
signify’d in _Nobilis_; and with us it hath been frequently used to
denote both Gentlemen, and Knights; for _Milites_ denotes Gentlemen, or
great Freeholders, and not dubbed Knights, _viz._ such who hold by
Knights Service from a Lord of a Mannour, and such who are chosen from
the several Counties to serve in the High Courts of Parliament.

_Miles_, even in the _Saxon_ Times, denoted sometimes a Dignity. But
about the Year 1046, becoming a Title of Honour, it is since most
generally appropriated to Persons who have received Knighthood
correspondent to _Eques_ and _Chevalier_, tho’ indeed less proper; in
regard Knighthood is the Dignity of Horsemanship, and the Tenure of
Lands by Knights Fees here in _England_, anciently called _Regale
Servitium_, is in truth Horse Service; and the Tenants such as served
the King on Horseback in Wars, are Gentlemen at least (if not of Noble
Extraction.)

_Minshew_ says, the _Equites_, which heretofore followed and
accompanied the Emperor, are, in the _German_ Tongue, called
_Knechtes_, that is, Servitors, or Ministers; but _Camden_ says,
_Knecht_, in _Saxon_ _Cniht_, was in far more ancient Times accepted as
an honorary Title; and, among the old _Germans_, signify’d a Person
arm’d with Spear and Lance, (the Ensigns of their Knighthood) as in
After-Times such were, among other Nations, adorned with a Girdle and
Belt, since called _Equites aurati_, and sometimes simply _Milites_.

THE Addition _Sir_ to the Names of all Knights Banerets, Knights of the
_Bath_, and Batchelor Knights, pronounced at the Time when they are
created, with this Compellation: _Arise, Sir John_, or _Sir Thomas,
&c._ is accounted Parcel of their Style, which the Banerets enjoy by
virtue of a Clause in their Patent. It is a Contraction of the Old
_French_ Sire, taken for Seigneur, or Lord, from the _Greek_ Κύριος.
But how it came to be first given, we cannot find; nevertheless, our
_English_ Writers have bestowed it upon the major Part of the Nobility,
after they had been received into the Order of Knighthood; and in the
Life of St. _Thomas Becket_, written about the Time of King _Edw._ 1.
we meet with the Title prefix’d to the Names of the four Knights, who
slew the said St. _Thomas_.

§. 6. THE Ensigns of the Equestrian Order among the _Romans_, by which
they were made, was a Publick Horse, or a Gold Ring; yet still, to
those who had Equestrian Cense, the Horse was the ancienter Badge of
the two; but when thro’ the Multitude of these Knights no Publick
Horses were assigned, but to such who were ready to enter upon Military
Service, and to fight in the Legions, such were called _Legionary
Knights_, to distinguish them from the rest, who had only receiv’d the
Honour of a Gold-Ring; for they were not all employ’d in Wars.

THE Censor (after the Institution of that Office _ab urbe condita_,
310.) and afterwards the Emperor, were the Persons who bestowed this
_Equus Militaris_, or _Publicus_, as it was called from the Annual
Allowance, to keep him, which they gave unto those of known Vertue and
approv’d Life, compelling him to serve in the Wars, tho’ against his
Will; (but in the more ancient Method of Election, Constraint was not
used.) And upon Negligence in the Care of these Horses, or any Blemish,
Reproach, or Infamy, or Loss of Patrimony in the Knights, the Horses
were not only taken away, but the Knights wholly disfranchis’d.
_Rosinus_ laying down the Manner and Order used in ejecting such
Knights, adds, _A Recital being made of all the Knights that were
inrolled, those whose Names he omitted, were thereby understood to be
depriv’d of that Dignity_.

WHEN they had served in the Wars the Time appointed by Law, it was the
Custom to lead their Horses by the Bridle into the Forum, before the
_Duumvirs_ [Censors,] and giving an Account under whom and what
Generals or Captains they had served; they were thereupon dismissed
from farther Service in the Wars: An Example whereof _Plutarch_ relates
to have been given by _Pompey_ himself.

BUT whereas among the _Roman_ Inscriptions we find _Equo publico
honoratus donatus_, _ornatus_, and _exornatus_, such is not to be
construed to be of Equestrian Dignity, but only to have received the
_præmia militaria_, with which the Emperors used to recompense some
particular Exploit, by the Honour of such a Gift, according to
_Salmasius_. _Equus Publicus_, by a wondrous, nevertheless an
accustom’d Speech, among the _Romans_, is the Knight, _qui equo publico
meret_. And _qui equo publico donatus_, the other deserving Person.

AS to the Ring: In _Genesis_ we read of _Pharoah_’s taking off his
Ring, and putting it upon _Joseph_’s Hand. When they came in Fashion
with the _Romans_, the Senators at first wore Iron ones, which were
accounted the Ensign of Military Vertue, received upon a Publick
Account. Howbeit, in Process of Time, when Gold Rings were drawn into
Use, none but Senators and Knights had them. The Difference among the
Rings of the three Orders in the State were, as _Licetus_ observes,
Gold Rings set with precious Stones were given to the Senators only;
Plain Rings without Stones to the Knights, and Iron Rings to the
_Plebeians_, or Free-born-men; insomuch that _Equestri dignitate
donare_ and _annulo honorare_, is a promiscuous Phrase in _Tacitus_, to
give the Dignity of Knighthood; and at the Battle of _Cannæ_, by the
two Measures or Bushels of Gold Rings sent to _Carthage_, the Number of
the _Roman_ Knights there slain was computed.

§. 7. AT length Freed-Men being created Knights, the _Jus annulorum_,
the Right of wearing Gold Rings, became promiscuous.

AMONG the _Germans_, the Shield and Lance were accounted the grand
Badges of Military Honour, or Knighthood. This the _Lombards_, the
_Franks_, and our Country-men, all descending out of _Germany_, used,
and was to us (in the Opinion of Sir _Hen. Spelman_) the Foundation of
the Knightly Order. Much like the ancient _Germans_ was the Custom of
making Knights among the _Irish_: And _Favine_ notes the Shield and
Lance were the proper Arms appertaining to a _French_ Knight, which
Esquires, _Armigers_, carried always after their Masters, Shields and
Scutes (as they are vulgarly called) _i. e._ Equestrian Targets,
inclining to an Oval, not Shields or Bucklers of Foot Soldiers.

ANOTHER Ensign and Ornament of Knightly Honour is, the _Cingulum
militare_, or _Balteus_, which, _Varro_ says, is _Tuscan_, signifying a
military Girdle, which were garnished with great Buckles, Studs, and
Rings of pure Gold, to shew their Dignity and Power in military
Commands; and with such a Belt, set with Pearls and precious Stones,
young _Athelstan_ was girded, when he receiv’d _Knighthood_ from his
Grandfather King _Alfred_. Our Knights were no less anciently known by
these Belts, than by their gilt Swords, Spurs, _&c._ Howbeit the Use
now only appears in Knights of the _Bath_.

TO this Belt was also added a Sword, not of Ordinary Use; and therefore
termed the Sword of a _Knight_, which was hallowed with great Ceremony.

ANOTHER eminent Badge is the Golden Spurs, wherewith, at the Time of
their Creation, Knights Spurs were wont to be adorned; and to these, a
little after the Conquest, were added far more and greater Ornaments.
They were usually put on after the Person had been presented to the
Prince who gave the Honour, to signify, that the new-made Knight should
not only declare his Valour by his Sword, but also by the Management of
his Horse, which he should encourage and excite with his Spurs, to the
carrying on his valiant Designs. These Spurs have been of that Esteem,
that Knight Batchelors are latinized _Equites aurati_; among the
_Germans_, _Ritter dess Gulden Sporns_; and with us heretofore,
_Knights of the Spurs_: And several Families by the Name of _Knight_,
bear for their Arms the Spurs on a Canton.

IT is farther certify’d among the Rights of a Knight Baneret, that upon
the Account of his Knighthood he may wear gilt Spurs, as well as a gilt
Sword; and that the Spurs are essential, may be collected from the
Degradation of a Knight, where his gilt Spurs are first cut off with an
Hatchet, the Case of Sir _Andra Harcla_. In the last Place is the
Collar, an Ensign of Knightly Dignity among the _Germans_, _Gauls_,
_Britons_, _Danes_ and _Goths_, among whom it was customary to wear
them, as denoting such as were remarkable for their Valour. But in
later Times, it was the peculiar Fashion of _Knights_ among us to wear
Golden Collars composed of _S S._ or other various Devices; so that
those _Monuments_ are known to be erected for _Knights_ on whose
Portraitures such Ornaments are found.

§. 8. THE Qualifications for Knighthood are principally three. 1.
Merit, the bare mentioning whereof shall suffice here. 2. Birth, _viz._
that the Parties who enter thereinto ought first to make appear they be
Gentlemen of three Paternal Descents, bearing Coat Armour; and much the
same was the Law of the Empire under _Frederick_ 2. _A. D._ 1212. Some
think it also insufficient, unless descended so by the Mother’s Side;
at least she must be a freed Woman. And, 3. Estate, which also serves
to support the Dignity.

THUS Wealth was so much regarded among the _Chaledonians_, that those
who were rich, bore the Name of Knights. It was Estate that entitled a
Man to this Honour among the _Romans_; for the Censor might compel any
Citizen equal to the Equestrian Cense, whom he thought fit to take that
Order: And this consisted of 400000 Sesterces, _i. e._ 3025 _l._ of our
Money.

AND as in _Old Rome_, so here in _England_, not long after the
Conquest, they who held a Knights Fee, _viz._ 680 Acres of Land might
claim it, says _Camden_. But it appears from _Selden_, that no certain
Number, or Extent of Acres, made a Knight’s Fee; and _Temp. Hen._ 3.
and _Edw._ 1. and 1 _Edw._ 2. the _Census militis_ was measured by 20
_l._ by the Year, or more; and by the Royal Prerogative, some who held
15, then 20, at other times 30, then 40, and sometimes 50 _l._ Lands,
were required to accept this Honour by Writs directed to the Sheriffs
of the Counties, and were excused only by Reason of old Age,
irrecoverable Weakness, Loss of Limbs, or being in Holy Orders; and
upon all other Causes (if exempted) they paid a Fine, estimated
according to the Nature of the Excuse, or length of Time given.

BUT in the promiscuous Course of Knighthood, where the Men of Wealth
and Estate (whether otherwise worthy or not) became dignify’d; yet the
Gate of Honour was not then shut against those, who wanting Riches,
deserved well of their Country; for when Princes conferr’d such
Dignities upon Men of narrow Fortunes, they usually bestowed with them
annual Pensions, or Lands, agreeable to the Judgment of the Author of
the _Division du monde_, who saith that the Honour of Knighthood is not
to be given any Person who hath not a considerable Estate, unless
sufficient Means to support the Honour of the Order be also given with
it.

THESE Pensions are frequently mention’d in our Rolls, sometimes during
Pleasure, and sometimes during the Life of the Knight, or till better
Provision should be made for their Supports: Examples whereof are, Sir
_John Atte Lee_, Sir _Nele Loring_, Sir _John Walsh_, Knights. The like
Rewards our Kings gave to such whose Merit raised them to the Degree of
a _Baneret_, express’d in their Patents, _ad manutenendum statum
Baneretti_, _Pro sustentatione sua_, _ut ipse statum Baneretti melius
manutenere possit_, _Pro statu suo manutenendo_; or Words to the like
Effect: Examples where of are, Sir _Reginald Cobham_, Sir _Thomas de
Rokeley_, Sir _John Lysle_, and Sir _Roger de Swynerton_, Banerets.

IT may be next consider’d who can make _Knights_; wherein it is
apparent, that they who never were, and others who never could be
_Knights_, have conferr’d this Dignity; yet ’tis to be understood, that
Necessity and Custom hath in this Case the Force of a Law: For
anciently, _Bishops_ and _Priests_ made _Knights_; so also do the
_Popes_, and some Commonwealths; likewise our _Queens_. For the
_Sovereign_, or the _Heir apparent_, tho’ they be no _Knights_, may
nevertheless do it, by reason they possess the _Kingdom_; and are
therefore the Head and Chief of _Chevalry_, and consequent all the
Power thereof is contained in their Command. To conclude this Point,
_Knighthood_ was always received from the Hands of another Person,
either by Ceremony, or Diploma, except only the Kings of _Spain_, who
Time out of Mind made themselves _Knights_; and this by Vertue of an
old Law written in the _Arragonian_ Tongue, as _Ambrosias Morales_
reports. _And, to shew that no Man upon Earth hath any Power over him,
he shall gird himself with the Sword made after the Form of a Cross;
and that Day can no other Man be Knighted._

§. 9. Of the Ceremonies and Formalities used at the Conferring of
Knighthood, the most ancient was perform’d by putting the Belt loose
over the Shoulder, or girding it close about the Waste. The _Bend_ in
_Armoury_ represents the one, and the _Fess_ the other. The first
Christian Kings at giving this Belt kissed the new Knight on the Left
Cheek, saying, _In the Honour of the Father, and the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, I make you a Knight_. It was called _Osculum pacis_, the
Kiss of Favour, or Brotherhood, and is presumed to be the Accollade, or
Ceremony of Imbracing, which _Charles_ the Great used when he Knighted
his Son _Lewis_ the _Debonair_. It was in the Time of the same Emperor,
the Way of Knighting by the _Colaphum_, or Blow on the Ear, used in
Sign of sustaining future Hardships, which is thought to have been
deriv’d from the Manner of Manumission of a Slave among the _Romans_; a
Custom long after retained in _Germany_ and _France_. Thus _William_
Earl of _Holland_, who was to be Knighted before he could be _Emperor_,
at his being elected King of the _Romans_, received Knighthood by the
Box of the Ear, _&c._ from _John_ King of _Bohemia_, _A. D._ 1247.

IN the Time of the _Saxons_ here in _England_, Knights received their
Institutions at the Hands of Great _Prelates_ or _Abbots_; which,
according to their Opinion, render’d them more auspicious. In the
accomplishing of which Solemnity, they added many religious Ceremonies,
as Watching, Fasting, Bathing, and Consecrating the Sword; an Instance
of which we have in _Heward_ Lord of _Brune_, in _Lincolnshire_, who
received this Honour from _Brand, Abbot_ of St. _Edmundsbury_. But not
long after the Conquest, this Custom was restrained by a Synod at
_Westminster_, _A. D._ 1102. 3 _H._ 1. which among other Things
ordained _Ne Abbates_ [_i. e._ all Spiritual Persons] _faciunt
milites_. However the religious Ceremonies for the most part continued,
especially Vigils and Bathings, as appears by that grand Solemnity at
the Creation of 267 Knights, Sons of Earls, Barons, and Knights, upon
_Whitsontide_, _anno_ 34 _Edw._ 1. cited by _Selden_ and _Camden_. And
these Formalities the _Saxons_ and _Normans_, not only here in
_England_, but the _French_, _Spaniards_, and other Nations, observ’d,
concluding from it, that decency of Habit was as well expected from
them, as Integrity of Life, and purity of Manners. And the like
religious Ceremony was heretofore observ’d in _Spain_ at the Creation
of Knights, whether _Cavelleros de Espuela d’Orada_, or _Amados_ [our
Knights Batchelors,] In this Form, the Person to be Knighted was bathed
in the Evening, and presently laid in Bed; then cloathed in rich Robes,
and led to the Church to perform his Vigils: That being over, and Mass
heard, his Spurs were put on, and his Sword girt about him, then drawn
out, and put into his Right Hand; whereupon the Oath was forthwith
administred to him; which taken, he that bestowed the Dignity gave him
_una Pesconade_, a Blow, or Stroke on the Neck, saying, God assist you
in the Performance of your Promise.

THE Oath or Vow the Knights professed, was in general, to relieve and
protect Widows, the Fatherless, Oppressed and Miserable, and to defend
the Church of God; which to keep and perform was esteem’d as
meritorious, as to do all that a Monk, Frier, or Canon Regular should.

THERE is also mention (by Mr. _Selden_) of consecrating the Sword,
offering it at the Altar, and receiving it again from thence, as an
implicit Kind of taking an Oath. But as in Peace and great Leisure
these tedious Ceremonies were used, yet it was otherwise in Times of
War, or on a Day of Battle, where Hurry and Throng of Affairs would not
permit; and therefore, as well before the joining of Battle, as after
Victory obtained, it was usual for the Prince or General in the Field,
on Sight of the Army, to give those whom he thought fit to advance to
that Honour (they humbly kneeling before him) a Stroke with a naked
Sword flatwise upon their Shoulders, or else to touch their Heads or
Shoulders lightly, without any other Ceremony, except pronouncing _Sis
Eques in nomine Dei_; to which he adds, _Rise, Sir —— Knight_, or in
the _French_, _Sus_, or _Sois, Chevalier, au nom de Dieu_, which we
commonly call Dubbing, the old _English_ Word used for Creating
[Consecrating] a Knight, from _doopen_ to dip, by Bathing.

ANOTHER Manner of creating Knights Abroad was, by Royal Codicils, or
Letters Patents (these the _Spaniards_ call _Privilegios de
Cavelleria_) whereupon such Knights are intitled _Equites
Codicellares_; and these were sent to such as dwelt in remote
Countries, and sometimes, but rarely, extended so as to make the Degree
hereditary. There is one Example, that by the bare signification of
Letter, without any Ceremonies or Patents under Seal; _Philip_ IV. of
_Spain_, _Jan._ 15. 1633. conferr’d upon all the Captains that behav’d
themselves valiantly in Defence of _Mastricht_ (then lately besieg’d by
the _Hollanders_) to those that were Gentlemen, the Title of Knights;
and to others, that of Gentlemen.

HAVING thus briefly shew’d the various Forms of Creation of _Knights
Batchelors_, I shall remark what _Selden_ has observ’d of _Knights
Bannerets_ in later Times, wherein he that was advanc’d to that Honour
in the Field, was inducted between two Senior Knights with Trumpets
before them, and the Heralds carrying a long Banner of his Arms, call’d
a _Penon_; in which Manner being brought to the King or Lieutenant, who
bidding him good Success, the Tip of the Banner is cut off, that of an
Oblong it might become a Square, like the Banner of a Baron: This done,
he returns to his Tent, conducted as before. As for the many and
various Formularies at the Creation of a Knight of the _Bath_, see Sir
_Edward Byshe_ among his Notes upon _Upton_ and Sir _William Dugdale_’s
_Warwicksh._ The Knights of the _Bath_, at the Coronation of King
_Charles_ II. watched and bathed; they took an Oath; they were girded
with a Sword and Belt; and lastly, dubbed by the King with the Sword of
State.

§ 10. IN the Dignity, Honour and Renown of Knighthood, is included
somewhat of Magnificence more excellent than Nobility it self; which
mounting the Royal Throne, becomes the Assertor of Civil Nobility, and
sits as Judge at the Tribunal therefore. _Knight_ is noted by _Camden_
as a Name of Dignity, but _Baron_ is not so. For if heretofore a Baron
had not receiv’d Knighthood, he was written plainly by his Christian
Name, and that of his Family, without any Addition but that of
_Dominus_, a Term attributed to a _Knight_; and in ancient Charters,
the Titles and Names of _Knights_ may be seen set before _Barons_. It
bestows Gentility not only upon the meanly Born, but upon his
Descendants, and encreaseth the Honour of those well-descended.
Hereunto agrees the Common-Law: If a Villain be made a Knight, he is
thereby immediately enfranchised, and consequently accounted a
Gentleman; agreeable to the _Roman_ Law, where the Donation of a
Gold-Ring ennobled a Slave. _Mœcenas_ dy’d a Companion of that Order;
even Kings and Princes look upon it as an Accession to their Honour,
their other Titles shewing Dominion and Power, this their Valour and
Courage. _Geysa_, King of _Hungary_, _Leopold_, Marquis of _Austria_,
_Ottacher_, Duke of _Stiria_, and _Frederick_, Duke of _Austria_ and
_Stiria_; _Godfry_, Duke of _Brabant_, with _Henry_ his Son, _Peter_,
King of _Arragon_, the Emperor _Henry_ III. our _William Rufus_, King
_Edward_ III. _Henry_ VI. _Henry_ VII. _Edward_ VI. _Lewis_ XI.
_Francis_ I. Kings of _France_, and others, received this Dignity at
the Time they enjoy’d their other Titles. And tho’ it is said the Sons
of the _French_ King are Knights as soon as they receive Baptism, yet
are they not judg’d worthy the Kingdom, unless first solemnly created.
And we elsewhere find, that the Royal Heirs of _Arragon_ were suspended
from that Crown, until they had received the Honour of Knighthood. And
after the _Norman_ Conquest, our young Princes were sent over to the
neighbouring Kings to receive this Honour. Thus our King _Henry_ II.
was sent to _David_, King of _Scots_, and Knighted by him in
_Carlisle_; and _Edward_ I. at the Age of Fifteen Years, to _Alphonsus_
XI. King of _Castile_, for the same Dignity. In like manner did foreign
Princes repair hither, to receive the Honour from our Kings. As
_Malcolme_, King of _Scotland_, and _Alexander_, Son of _William_, King
of _Scotland_, Knighted by our King _John_, _Anno_ 1212. So was
_Alexander_ III. by our King _Henry_ III. at _York_, _Anno_ 1252. and
_Magnus_, King of the _Isle of Man_, by the same King. All which
sufficiently demonstrate the great Renown of Knighthood, and the Honour
and Esteem which was ever had for that Order.




                                CAP. II.

        _Of the Religious Orders of Knighthood in Christendom._


§ 1. THE Grounds and Causes of founding _Societies_ or _Knightly
Orders_, were several and different, tho’ all terminated in one End.
Among which, principally were these, _First_, A sincere Love to
_Honour_, and therein chiefly to excite and promote _Vertue_ by
suitable Rewards; such was the Design of King _Arthur_, when he formed
himself and other Martial Men into a Fellowship, which he stiled
_Knights of the Round Table_. _Secondly_, To repress the Incursions and
Robberies of the _Saracens_ and _Barbarians_, to vindicate the
Oppressed, redeem the Enslaved, and to entertain and relieve Pilgrims
and Strangers, which were Part of the Duties the _Knights Hospitallers_
and _Templars_, &c. stood engag’d in. A _third_ Reason was, To Fight in
Defence of the Christian Faith, against Pagans and Infidels; to enlarge
the Christian Territories, and promote the Service of the Catholick
Church: And indeed their Zeal very much advanced Christianity.
_Lastly_, When Sovereign Princes perceived themselves embroiled in Wars
or dangerous Factions, the erecting such an Order or Society was, that
they might by such a Tye restore Peace, quiet all Jealousies, unite
Affections, and secure a lasting Friendship and powerful Assistance,
both for their own and their Country’s Safety. And to this End were
Badges of several Orders devised, as Pledges of Remembrance to quicken
and establish their Friendship.

§ 2. THESE Orders are of Two Kinds, 1. _Religious_, or
_Ecclesiastical_; and, 2. _Military_, or _Secular_.

§ 3. THE Institutions of the latter Sort were after a while thought too
weak to continue, if not sustained by Religion and Piety; and too
defective without adjoyning Ecclesiastical Persons thereunto. Therefore
the Founders, considering Divine Assistance should concur with Military
Industry, began to dedicate these Orders to the Honour and Worship of
God, or to our Saviour, or to the blessed Virgin, or some other of the
Saints, to gain the Protection and Favour of Heaven, more easily, as
they thought, obtainable by the Prayers and Offices of the Clergy.
Whereupon some in their Institution joyned Sacred Orders to their
Military, and made Provision for Sacred Persons to pray for their
Prosperity at home, while they were engaged abroad. Hence King _Edw._
III. at the first Institution of the _Garter_, appointed Thirteen
Secular Canons, and Thirteen Vicars to attend the Celebration of Divine
Offices. Upon the same Account certain Foundations of Divine Service
were erected at _Bugey_, for the Order of the _Annunciads_; at _Dijon_,
for the Order of the _Golden Fleece_; and at _Mont St. Michael_ in
_Normandy_, for the Order of St. _Michael_.

§ 4. I shall now deliver a brief Account of the Religious Orders of
Knighthood, proceeding according to their Antiquity.


         1. _The Knights of the_ Holy Sepulchre _in_ Jerusalem,
                   _are accounted the most Ancient_.

DR. _Heylin_ reports this Order to be instituted _A. D._ 1099. at such
Time as the Temple of _Jerusalem_ was regain’d from the _Saracens_ by
_Philip_ King of _France_. Yet _Favin_ will have it to be by _Baldwin_
the First, King of _Jerusalem_; for while the _Saracens_ possess’d the
City, there were certain Canons Regular of St. _Augustin_, to whom they
permitted the Custody of the Holy Sepulchre. These Canons _Baldwin_
made Men of Arms, and _Knights of the Holy Sepulchre_, and ordained
that they should nevertheless retain their white Habits, and on the
Breast bear his own Arms, which were _Argent a Cross potent: Or_,
between _four Crosses of the same_, commonly call’d _The_ Jerusalem
_Cross_. Their Great Master was the Patriarch of _Jerusalem_. They were
to guard the Sepulchre, fight against the _Saracens_ and Infidels,
protect Pilgrims, redeem Christian Captives, hear Mass every Day,
recite the Hours of the Cross, and to bear the five red Crosses in
memory of our Saviour’s Wounds. Their Rule was confirm’d by Pope
_Innocent_ III. Upon the loss of the Holy Land, these Knights retired
to _Perugia_ in _Italy_; but retaining their white Habit, chang’d their
Arms to a double _red Cross_. _A. D._ 1484. they were incorporated to
the _Knights Hospitallers of_ Jerusalem then in _Rhodes_. But _A. D._
1496. _Alexander_ VI. made himself, and the Popes his Successors, Great
Masters thereof, and empower’d the Guardian of the Holy Sepulchre (his
Vicar General) to bestow the same upon Pilgrims to the Holy Land.
_Philip_ II. King of _Spain_, endeavour’d to restore this Order in some
of his Dominions, about the Year 1558. himself being elected Great
Master: And another Attempt was made by the Duke of _Nevers_, 1615. but
these Designs took no Effect.


     2. _Knights Hospitallers of St._ John Baptist _in_ Jerusalem.

BEFORE the taking of _Jerusalem_ from the _Saracens_, certain Christian
Merchants of _Naples_ obtain’d leave from the Caliph of _Egypt_ to
erect a small and convenient House, for the Entertainment of themselves
and Countrymen, which they built before the Church of the _Holy
Sepulchre_, together with a small Oratory. To them repair’d certain
Canons of the Order of St. _Augustin_, who built another Oratory; but
the Confluence of Pilgrims growing great, they erected a large
Hospital, in the Place where our Saviour celebrated his last Supper,
for the better accommodating devout Travellers, who for want of a Place
to lodge in were often robb’d and murder’d: So that at length from
their Charity and Hospitality, as also for that they took St. _John
Baptist_ for their Patron, they obtain’d that Title. It was instituted
_A. D._ 1092. or according to others 1099. by _Gerard_, a Native of
_Thoulouse_, who came to _Jerusalem_ in the Time of _Godfry_ of
_Bouillon_, and built this Hospital (which became the first Seat of
this Order) dedicated to St. _John_ of _Cyprus_, Bp. of _Alexandria_,
commonly call’d _Johannes Eleemosynarius_; and King _Baldwin_ I.
conferred on them large Privileges, permitting them Arms, and
instituted them to be Knights, _A. D._ 1104. Their Duty was to fight
against the Infidels, and they acknowledged Obedience to the Patriarch
of _Jerusalem_; but growing rich, they obtained from _Rome_ to be
absolved from that Obedience. Pope _Gelasius_ II. or _Calixtus_ II. _A.
D._ 1120. confirmed their Rule of living; and _Adrian_ IV. receiv’d
them under the Protection of the Papal See, being likewise endowed with
ample Privileges, and exempted from Payment of Tithes, by succeeding
Popes, chiefly by _Pius_ IV.

THEY took the black Habit of Hermits of St. _Augustin_, and lived under
his Rule by Grant of _Honorius_ II. _Anno_ 1125. vowing Obedience,
Poverty, and Chastity; and on the Breast of their Habit wore at first a
plain Cross of White Cloth, which was after changed to one with Eight
Points; but in time of War they used a Red Cassock, bearing the White
Cross upon it. Unto _Gerard_ succeeded _Raimund_, who digested and
enlarged their Laws and Institutions in the Composition whereof his
Stile was _Raimundus Dei gratia servus pauperum Jesu Christi & Custos
Hospitalis Jerusolymitani_; but afterwards he and his Successors had
the Title of Great Master of the Order given him, to denote his Power
and Authority. At this Day he has the Title of Prince of _Malta_ and
_Goza_; among his Privileges he seals in Lead, as doth the Pope and
Doge of _Venice_; he acknowledges the Pope for his Head, and the King
of _Spain_ for his Patron; he had under him in several Kingdoms Priors;
some of whom had also the Addition of Great with us in _England_ he was
stiled _Prior Hospitalis; St. Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia_, and by
that Title was he summoned to the Parliament as a Baron of this
Kingdom, and at length for Place and Precedency was ranked the first
Baron; and the greatness of these Knights grew to such height that
_temp. H._ 3. they had in Christendom 19000 Mannors.

WHEN _Saladine_ took _Jerusalem_, these Knights retreated to _Acres_ or
_Ptolemais_, and that being taken they seized upon the Island of
_Rhodes_, _A. D._ 1308. whence they began to be call’d Knights of
_Rhodes_; but _A. D._ 1522. being driven, thence by _Solyman_, they
betook themselves to the Island of _Malta_, which with _Tripoli_ and
_Goza_ were granted to them in Fee by the Emperor _Charles_ V. _A. D._
1530. under the Tender of one Falcon yearly to the Viceroy of _Sicily_,
and to acknowledge the King of _Spain_ and _Sicily_ for their
Protectors. In this Isle they continue a Bulwark to those Parts, and
from this their Settlement are called Knights of _Malta_.


                         3. _Knights_ Templars.

ABOUT the Year 1117, 1118, 1119, or 1120, this Order took Beginning,
_Baldwin_ II. then reigning in _Jerusalem_; when Nine Gentlemen, of
whom Two of noble Extraction, _Hugh de Paganes_ and _Godfrey de St.
Omer_, came in Devotion to the _Holy Land_; they were called Brothers
of the Militia of the Temple, ordinarily Knights Templars, from the
Habitation assigned them out of a part of the King’s own Palace,
adjoyning to the Temple of _Solomon_ in _Jerusalem_. Their first
Undertaking was to guard the most dangerous Ways about that City,
against the Violence and Robberies of the _Saracens_, which made them
acceptable to all, and for which they had Remission of their Sins; but
for the first Nine Years they were yet so poor that they lived upon the
Alms of others, wore Clothes bestowed in Charity upon them, and rode
two on one Horse; in memory of which primitive Poverty their Seal had
the Impress, which is represented in _Math. Paris_, _A. D._ 1127. They
had Rules assigned them, drawn up by St. _Bernard_ Abbot of
_Clairvaux_, by the Appointment of Pope _Honorius_ II. and _Stephen_
Patriarch of _Jerusalem_. They made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty
and Chastity, and to live under the Rules of Canons regular of St.
_Augustin_. Their Habit was White, to which, in the Time of _Eugenius_
III. they added the Red Cross, and of the same Form that the
Hospitallers wore (_Favin_ says a patriarchal Cross) and sowed it on
the left Shoulder of the _Maulles_. These with the Holy Sepulchre
Hospitallers and Teutonicks, principally supported a long time the
Kingdom of _Jerusalem_; but when Riches encreas’d, and their Revenues
augmented, they grew proud, fell from the Obedience of the Patriarch to
joyn with the Pope; and at last, 1307. all the Knights of this Order in
_France_ were, in one and the same Hour, seized and imprison’d by
_Philip le Bel_, King of France, with Consent of Pope _Clement_ V.
being charged with most infamous and damnable Crimes. And in _England_,
_Anno 1. Ed. 2._ they were also apprehended afterwards, rendred
Convicts, and all their Possessions seized into the King’s Hands.
Howbeit the Bishop of _York_ commiserating their deplorable Condition
within his Diocess, charitably disposed of them in Monasteries under
his Jurisdiction. Two Years after many of these Knights were burn’d in
_France_, and _Jaques de la Maule_, the last great Master, suffered the
same Fate, having seen, _A. D._ 1312. his Order by Papal Authority,
condemned and perpetually dissolved; after which their Lands were
annexed to the Hospitallers, for their Service against the _Turks_.

THUS they fell, no less famous for Martial Atchievments in the East,
than their Wealth in the West; for they enjoyed 16000 Lordships in
_Europe_, and a _Spanish_ Author tells us, their Revenue was Two
Millions yearly, and had in possession 40000 Commanderies, which
occasion’d divers to think they were falsly accused, and by suborned
Witnesses, merely upon the Ambition and covetous Design of _Philip_
King of _France_.


               4. _Knights of the Order of St._ Lazarus.

THESE were at the first a Fraternity of Religious Monks, after which
they became Ecclesiastick Knights, in Imitation of the Knights of the
Holy Sepulchre. Pope _Pius_ V. 1572. stiles it _Antiquissimum
Charitatis & Militiæ Christi Ordinem_; yet it must be understood as an
Order of Monks, founded by St. _Basil_, about the time of _Julian the
Apostate_, _A. D._ 366. upon a Charitable Account, _viz._ to take Care
of Leprous Persons (a Malady frequent in the East) by which they became
separated, even from the Conversation of Men. At length, through the
Incursion of the _Barbarians_, and Injury of Time, it lay extinguish’d,
but was revived when the _Latin_ Princes joyned in a Holy League to
recover the _Holy Land_. And a famous Hospital was erected at
_Jerusalem_, under the Title of St. _Lazarus_, for the Reception of
Lepers: For in that Time the Monks of this Order added Martial
Discipline to their Skill in Physick; and for their Services against
the Infidels, begat a great Esteem from _Baldwin_ II. King of
_Jerusalem_, and some of his Successors. In process of Time this Order
decayed, being suppressed by _Innocent_ VIII. who united it to the
_Hospitallers_ at _Rhodes_, _A. D._ 1490. Nevertheless _Pius_ IV.
restored it _A. D._ 1565. confirming the old, and granting new
Privileges, making his kinsman Don _Janot de Chastillon_ great Master.
_Pius_ V. _A. D._ 1567. enlarged their Privileges, permitting them to
take one Wife only, to wit, a Virgin, not a Widow. Lastly, Pope
_Gregory_ XIII. _A. D._ 1572. bestowed the Great Mastership of this
Order upon _Emanuel Philibert_ Duke of _Savoy_, and his Successors, and
prescribed them the _Cistercian_ Rule; and accordingly he had the
Investiture and Collation of the _Commanderies_ in _Spain_ and _Italy_.


           5. _Knights of the_ Teutonick _Order, or_ Prussia.

IN the Time of the Holy War, a wealthy Gentleman of _Germany_, who
dwelt at _Jerusalem_, commiserating the Condition of his Country-men,
coming thither in Devotion, made his House their Receptacle; afterwards
he erected a Chapel to the Blessed Virgin, whence they had also the
Title of _Marian_ Knights. To him associated other _Germans_, and in
short time encreasing, they professed the Military Employments of the
_Templars_, and followed the Acts of Piety and Charity of the
_Hospitallers_. _A. D._ 1190. or 1191. they elected _Henry Walpott_
their first Master, and the following Year were confirmed by
_Celestine_ III. under the Title of Knights _Teutonicks_, or _Dutch_
Knights, of the Hospital of St. _Mary_ the Virgin, vowing Poverty,
Obedience, and Charity, and following the Rule of St. _Augustin_. Their
Statutes were composed from those of the _Hospitallers_ and _Templars_,
and One Article was, _That none but_ Germans _should be of this Order_.
Their Habit was a White Mantle, on the Breast a plain _Black Cross_,
but some make it a _Black Cross_ voided with a _Cross Potent_. At
_Acon_ they erected another Hospital; but after that City was taken by
_Saladine_, they removed under _Hermannus_ their Master into _Germany_,
on whom the Emperor _Frederick_ II. _A. D._ 1229. and Pope _Honorius_
III. bestowed _Prussia_; where having conquer’d that Nation, and
reduced it from Paganism, they built the City of _Maryburgh_, and
there, _A. D._ 1340. fixed the chief Residence of their great Master.
This Country they enjoyed till 1525. that _Albertus Brandenburgh_, the
Last great Master, made solemn Renunciation of that Order, and became
feudatory to _Sigismond_ I. King of _Poland_, who created this _Albert_
first Duke of _Prussia_: However, some of the Knights disrellishing
this Action elected another great Master, _viz._ _Albert Wolfang_, and
leaving _Prussia_ setled in _Germany_, where they now reside. The
younger Sons of the _German_ Princes being, for the most part received
into this Order, giving it the greatest Reputation.


                       6. _Knights of_ Mount-Joy.

THESE are so called, from a Castle where this Order was instituted,
built upon the Point of a Mountain not far from _Jerusalem_, whence the
Pilgrims first view’d the _Holy City_, and where these Knights lay in
Garrison. Their Habit was White, and the Badge thereof an _Octogonal
Cross Red_; they vowed Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and followed
the Rule of St. _Basil_; which Pope _Alexander_ III. _A. D._ 1180.
changed to that of _Augustine_. Upon the Loss of the _Holy Land_ they
retired to _Spain_, and fought against the _Moors_, and according to
the Places they resided, in had other Names, in _Catalonia_ and
_Valentia_, _Equites de Mongoia_, i. e. _Mount Joy_; but in _Castile_,
Knights of _Monfrac_, a Castle there. When _Alphonso_ IX. King of
_Castile_ gave them Lands they had won from the _Moors_, the Donation
says, _To you Don_ Rodrigo Gonsales, _Master of_ Monfrac, _of the Order
of_ Mount Joy. Upon the Decay of this Order, _A. D._ 1221. this Castle
was given to Don _Gonsalionez_, Master of the Order of _Calatrava_, by
_Ferdinand_ the Saint; and these Knights were incorporated with them.


             7. _Knights of St._ John _of_ Acon _or_ Acres.

UNDER the Patronage of this Saint was this Order erected; they
exercised all Duties of Charity towards Pilgrims, and assumed Arms in
imitation of the _Hospitallers_; they followed the Rule of St.
_Augustine_; and according to _Favina_, had a Black Habit, upon which
they wore a _White Cross patee_. After _Acon_ was taken they removed
into _Spain_, and flourished in the Reign of _Alphonsus_ the Astrologer
King of _Castile_, about which time Pope _Alexander_ IV. approved the
Order under the conjoined Title of St. _Thomas_ and St. _John_ of
_Acon_. This King gave them by his Will all the Furniture of his House,
and much Money; but afterward they dwindled, and at last were united to
the _Hospitallers_. The Ensign was a _Red Cross_, in the middle whereof
stood the Figures of St. _John_ and St. _Thomas_.


                      8. _Knights of St._ Thomas.

DISTINCT from the former, yet wearing the same Habit, as the Knights of
St. _John_ of _Acon_, making the same Processions, and following the
same Rule; their Badge was a _Saltire Gules_, (or as others are of
Opinion) the same with that of St. _John_ of _Acon_, wanting the
Figures in the middle: But _Favin_ reports, this Order was instituted
by King _Richard_ I. after the Surprizal of _Acon_; and that these
Knights were of the _English_ Nation, who wore a White Habit and a _Red
Cross_, charged in the middle with an _Escallon_, and that St. _Thomas
Becket_ was their Patron. Howbeit, after the Christians were driven out
of the _Holy Land_, the Knights of this Order were joined to the
_Hospitallers_.


                       9. _Knights of St._ Blaze.

THESE were also called Knights _de Sta. Maria_; they were Officers and
Servants to the Kings of _Armenia_; their Habit was Sky colour with a
_Cross Gold_ on their Breasts; others say a _Red Cross_, and in the
middle the Picture of St. _Blaze_, their Patron. This Order was at the
height, when the _Armenian_ Kings of the House of _Luzignan_ kept their
Court in _Acon_.


               10. _Knights of the Martyrs in_ Palestine.

THESE took their Denomination from an Hospital in _Palestine_,
dedicated to St. _Cosmus_ and St. _Damianus_, Martyrs; where Acts of
Charity were exercised towards Sick Strangers. Their Profession obliged
them to other Works of Mercy, _viz._ to redeem Captives, and bury their
Dead. They followed the Rule of St. _Basil_, which was confirmed to
them by Pope _John_ XXII. There Badge was a _Red Cross_, in the middle
whereof, within a Circle, was the aforesaid Two _Saints_. When they
retir’d into _Europe_ they changed into a _Red Cross_, and St.
_Augustin_’s Rule.


            11. _Knights of St._ Catherine _at Mount_ Sinai.

THIS Order was instituted, _A. D._ 1063. under the Patronage of St.
_Catherine_, whose Body was there deposited in the Church of the
Monastery erected and dedicated to her Name. Their first Institution
was to guard the said Sepulchre, to secure Travellers, defend the
_Grecian_ Pilgrims, and to relieve them with Hospitality. Their Habit
was White, and they lived under the Rule of St. _Basil the Great_,
vowing conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to the Abbot of this Monastery,
who was their Superior. But when the _Turks_ obtained these Countries,
these Knights were ill treated and driven away, and the Order almost
abolished; nevertheless some Shadow remains for such as travel to visit
the Holy Sepulchre at _Jerusalem_, do now and then pass to this
Monastery at Mount _Sinai_, where in imitation of the _Padre Guardian_
of _Jerusalem_, the principal Monk in this Covent makes them Knights of
St. _Catherine_ over her Tomb, with the like Questions and Formulary as
used at the Holy Sepulchre. These Knights now wear upon the left side
of their White Habit the Cross of _Jerusalem_, and Instrument of St.
_Catherine_’s Martyrdom; but according to others, the middle of the
Wheel is pierced with a Sword.


              12. _Knights of St._ Anthony _in_ Æthiopia.

AFTER the Death of St. _Anthony_ the Hermite, who dy’d about the Year
357. many of his Disciples remaining near _Æthiopia_, follow’d his
Example and Manner of Life, and their Successors liv’d in great
Austerity and Solitariness in the Desart (therefore call’d
_Anchorites_) till the Year 370. when ’tis said _John_, Emperor of
_Æthiopia_, erected them into a Religious Order of Knighthood, under
the Title and Protection of St. _Anthony_, Patron of his Empire, and
bestow’d upon them great Privileges; and being thus instituted, they
receiv’d St. _Basil_’s Rule, and cohabited in Monasteries. Their Habit
is black, with a blue Cross _Tau_. Their chief Seat is in the _Isle of
Meroe_; but in other Parts of _Æthiopia_ they have great Numbers of
Convents, and no less than 2000000 of annual Revenue. The eldest Sons
of Nobles and Gentlemen cannot be admitted, but the second Sons may;
and if a Man (except a Physician) have three Sons, he is bound to
assign one of them to be of this Order. Their Vow is to observe
conjugal Chastity; to die in Defence of the Christian Faith; to guard
the Empire; to obey their Laws and their Superiors; and to go to War
when and wheresoever commanded: Moreover, they take an Oath not to
fight in Wars between Christians, nor receive Holy Orders, or marry
without License. They are of two Sorts: One employ’d in the Wars, the
other who being Old are exempted from Military Services, and retire
themselves under the Title and Profession of Monks, to the Abbies where
they first took their Habit; before which they must serve three Years
against the _Arabian_ Pyrates about the _Red Sea_, three Years against
the _Turks_, and three against the _Moors_ upon the Borders of
_Borneo_. When they come to be admitted into their Abbey, they are
introduced in their Military Habit, of which being disrob’d, the
Religious one is put on, _viz._ a black Gown reaching down to the
Ground, lined with blue, having a blue Cross fix’d to the Breast, and
over that a black Cowle; they are afterwards led to the Church, and
there make their Profession. _Philip_ VII. Son to the Founder, enlarg’d
their Lands and Privileges, and added a Border of _Gold_ to the Badge
of the _blue Cross_, as observed at this Day.

IN _Italy_, _France_ and _Spain_, there are a Sort of Monks that have
the Title of Knights of St. _Anthony_, which observe the Rule of St.
_Augustin_, and they wear a plain Cross like that in _Æthiopia_; but
the Principals of these wear a double St. _Anthony_’s Cross of blue
Satin, the one above the other. Their chief Seat is at _Vienne_ in
_Dauphine_, of which Place the General of the Order bears the Title of
Abbot, the Monastery being erected into an Abbey 1297. in Honour of St.
_Anthony_, whose Body was translated thither from _Constantinople_; and
all other Places built in Honour of his Name, were made subject to him
_A. D._ 1523. _Morœus_ calls them _The Hospitallers of St._ Anthony,
and says they begun in _France_ _A. D._ 1121. from _Gaston_ a Nobleman
of _Vienna_. But _Baronius_ and others say, _Gaston_ and _Gerin_
instituted it earlier, making the Letter _Thau_ their Ensign or Badge.


        13. _The_ Constantinian _Angelick Knights of St._ George
                    _in_ Greece, _but now in_ Italy.

MARQUEZ, a _Spanish_ Writer, makes this one of the first Military
Orders in Christendom, and derives a formal Institution, Rules and Laws
from _Constantine_ the Great, which appears little better than
Fabulous, therefore we shall omit his Account.

THE Great Masters have their chief Seat and Convent at _Brianno_ near
_Venice_, and is Hereditary in the Family of _Angelus Flavius
Comnenus_. Among the rest of their Prerogatives, the Masters are
_Commensales Pontificum_, i. e. may sit at the Table with the Pope, who
defends them as Benefactors to the Church, and Founders of the
_Lateran_ Cathedral at _Rome_. As Subjects to no Prince, they have
Power of coyning Money: They give Titles of Counts and Princes to their
own Fraternity, and take upon them the restoring to _Honours_, of
legitimating _Bastards_, making _Doctors_, _Poets Laureats_ and
_Publick Notaries_. This Order is under the Protection of the Virgin
_Mary_ and Patronage of St. _George_; and they profess Obedience and
conjugal Chastity; they wear a white Habit, on the left Side whereof is
sowed a red or crimson Velvet Cross, Flory; in the middle is the
_Labarum_ ⳨ imbroidered with the Letter A upon one Arm of the Cross,
and Ω on the other. The Sides are wrought with Gold and Silk, but the
_Labarum_ is all Gold. Amongst these Knights are three Degrees; the
first call’d Collered or Grand Crosses, wearing a Collar form’d of
_Labarums_, whereat hangs the Cross and St. _George_. The second are
the Knights, and these wear the Cross above describ’d. The third are
Servants, and they bear the Cross only, without the _Labarum_. The many
Grand Priorates or Commanderies belonging to this Order, shew the Power
they were formerly endow’d with.


        14. _Knights of St._ James _in_ Galicia _or_ Sanctiago.

THIS is the principal Order in _Spain_, and had its Title of _Don
Raniro_, King of _Leon_, who about the Year 826. at _Clavigio_, by the
Assistance of St. _James_ (said to appear upon a white Horse, bearing a
Banner with a _red Cross_) and gain’d a mighty Victory over a great
Army of the _Moors_. Some place the Institution about the Year 1160.
others 1175. whereas it was only then confirm’d, and their Rule of
Living prescrib’d by Pope _Alexander_ III. there being a Fraternity of
Knights in Spain, _A. D._ 1030. under a _Master_ and _Governor_, with
Revenues.

AND altho’ this Order at first were dispos’d to vertuous Courses, and
valiantly to encounter the _Moors_, Enemies to the _Cross_ of _Christ_,
yet in time they became scandalously perverted, but were afterwards
reduc’d to a better Life, and approv’d on by the said Pope _Alexander_,
who receiv’d them into the Protection of the Papal See, and gave them
the Rule of St. _Augustin_, the Form of holding Chapters, of electing
their _Masters_, of _Treves_, and thirteen Commendadores of Houses, and
of the Visitors; and in short very large Privileges, together with the
Monastery of St. _Lorjo_, situate in _Galicia_ near _Sanctiago_; and
the Prior and Canons thereof were incorporated into this Order.

THEIR Ensign is a _red Cross_, which the Knights wear upon their
Breast, terminating like the Blade of a Sword, the Hilt crosletted and
fashion’d after the ancient Manner; whereupon it was call’d _La Order
de Sanctiago de la Espada_.

THEIR Habit is a white Mantle close before, on the Breast whereon is
placed the said Cross, made of Silk or Cloth, and they are obliged to
wear it upon their Garments, Coats or Cloaks, tho’ they use Crosses of
Gold likewise.

WHEN the _Moors_ were driven out of _Spain_, and the principal Branch
of this Order expir’d, upon a Contest for the Place of Great Master,
the Crown of _Castile_ stepp’d in between, and by consent of the
Knights, obtain’d it under the Title of Administrator, which was
granted to King _Ferdinand_; and his Son _Charles_ V. annex’d it with
all its Rights, _&c._ to his Successors in the Kingdoms of _Castile_
and _Leon_. Since which, the Kings of _Spain_ now enjoy the
Administration of this Order, and carry that Title and Stile in the
Inscription upon the Great Seal thereof, which holds the Royal Arms of
_Spain_, upon a Cross that filleth all the Shield, with a Sword at each
of the four Corners.


               15. _Knights of St._ Saviour _in_ Arragon.

THESE were instituted _A. D._ 1118. by Don _Alphonso_, call’d _Emperor_
of _Spain_, _King_ of _Navarre_, _Arragon_, &c. chosen out of the
_Spanish_ and _French_ Nobility that assisted in his Wars. He form’d
them into a Society, the better to enable him to drive the _Moors_ out
of _Saragossa_, and the whole Territory of _Arragon_. Their Rule of
living was the _Cistercian_, and somewhat conformable to the _Knights
Templars_. When the _Moors_ were driven out of _Spain_, their rich
_Commanderies_ were at length united to the Crown.

THEIR Habit was a white Mantle, on the Breast whereof was a _red Cross
Anchre_; but some say it was the Figure of our Saviour.


                  16. _Knights_ d’Avis _in_ Portugal.

DON _Alphonso Henriquez_, first King of _Portugal_, took from the
_Moors_, _A. D._ 1147. the City of _Evora_, and to strengthen it, sent
thither several gallant Commanders, who assum’d the Title of Knights of
St. _Mary_ of _Evora_, putting themselves under the Protection of our
blessed Lady. Not long after they were call’d _d’Avis_, from a Castle
upon the _Portuguese_ Frontiers, conquer’d from the _Moors_, whither
they transplanted themselves. It was confirm’d by Pope _Innocent_ III.
_A. D._ 1204. under the Rule of St. _Benedict_, and therefore in some
Papal Rules call’d of St. _Benedict d’Avis_. The _Knights_ profess
_conjugal Chastity_ and _Obedience_. _Anno_ 1213. they submitted
themselves to the _Rule_, _Statutes_ and _Visitation_ of the Order of
_Calatrava_; but in the Time of _John_ of _Portugal_ (natural Son to
_Pedro_ King of _Portugal_) seventh Great Master _d’Avis_, they cast
off their Acknowledgments to _Calatrava_, and never after submitted to
them; and afterwards, when the Crown of _Portugal_ fell into the Hands
of _Philip_ II. King of _Spain_, this Order was govern’d according to
the Statutes of _Portugal_.

Their Badge is a _green Cross, Flory_, (such as the _Knights_ of
_Alcantara_ us’d to wear.) They must be Gentlemen by Extraction, both
of the Father’s and Mother’s side.


           17. _Knights of St._ Michael_’s Wing in_ Portugal.

About the Year 1165. others say 1171. Don _Alphonso_, who founded the
Order _d’Avis_, founded this also after his obtaining a notable Victory
over the _Moors_ and _Albara_ King of _Sevil_, in which Battle St.
_Michael_ the Archangel is said to appear on the right Side of
_Alphonso_, and fight against them.

Their Investiture, _&c._ was the same with _d’Avis_. It is now grown
out of Use, but the Mastership remains with the King of _Portugal_.


                      18. _Knights of St._ Gereon.

This Order was establish’d by _Frederick Barbarossa_ the Emperor;
others say by _Frederick_ II. and consisted only of the _German_
Nation. They follow’d the Rule of St. _Augustin_, and wore a white
Habit, whereon was sow’d a black Patriarchal Cross, set on a little
green Hill.


       19. _Knights of St._ Julian de Pereyro, _or of_ Alcantara.

They had the first Appellation from St. _Julian de Pereyro_, a Town in
_Leon_, where they had a Monastery built for them by _Ferdinand_ II.
King of _Leon_ and _Galicia_, who in his Diploma of Privileges granted
thereunto 1176. stiled himself Protector of this Society of Knights. In
the Approbation-Bull of Pope _Alexander_ III. their Chief is called
Prior; but in that of Pope _Lucius_ III. he is stiled Master of
_Pereyro_. They used a Secular Habit, modest and grave, and the
Ecclesiasticks a Clerical Habit, with a Shred of Cloth and a Scapulary,
to distinguish them from other Seculars and Ecclesiasticks. They
observed the Rule of St. _Benedict_ moderated, as it was convenient for
the Exercise of Arms against the _Moors_, for which End it was
instituted. Their ancient Badge was a _Pear-tree Vert_, in Allusion to
the Name.

The Occasion of altering the first Appellation was upon change of their
Habitation. Pope _Adrian_ VI. annex’d this Mastership, together with
those of St. _James_ and _Calatrava_, to the Royal Crown of _Castile_
for ever.


          20. _Knights of_ Trugillo _or_ Truxillo _in_ Spain.

This Order is so call’d from the City of _Trugillo_ in _Estremadura_,
but when, or by whom founded, or their Badge, is unknown. Some suppose
these Knights the same with that of _Alcantara_; ’tis evident they were
in being _A. D._ 1227. when ’tis pretended the Master of _Alcantara_
took _Trugillo_ from the _Moors_, and plac’d there a Brotherhood of
Knights. But it seems these Knights of _Truxillo_, were a distinct
Order several Years before, and ’tis not unlikely that they might be
incorporated into that of St. _Julian de Pereyro_, and by this Means
the Order of _Alcantara_ acquired the Towns of _Trugillo_, _Sancta
Cruz_, &c. which _Alfonso_ IX. King of _Castile_ had given them. They
were to be of Noble Descent, and make proof of their Gentility; they
were obliged to be near the King’s Person, and to attend him in all
Martial Expeditions, maintaining always Two Horses and Servants in
Readiness.


                      21. _Knights of_ Calatrava.

This Order was instituted in _Castile_ by _Sanchio_ III. and so called
from _Calatrava_, a Frontier Castle of _Castile_ and _Toledo_, which
the _Moors_ took, _A. D._ 714. compounded of the _Arabick_ _Cala_ a
Castle, and the _Spanish_ _Travas_ Manacles, with which the _Moors_
fettered the Christians; 400 Years after which, upon the Recovery of
the Town from the _Moors_, it was given to the Knights _Templars_; but
they, unable to stop the mighty Conquests of the _Moors_, the said
_Sanchio_ by Proclamation promis’d the Inheritance to any who would
undertake the Defence of it, being the Key of the Kingdom of _Toledo_.
At length _Raymond_ of _Barcelona_ (formerly a Knight, then a
_Cistercian_ Abbot) by the Perswasion of _Velasquez_, accepted the
Proffer, and had the Donation, _A. D._ 1158. and fortifying it by the
Help of his Associates, this Order arose, call’d at first _Militia de
Calatrava_. Upon the account of the Fertility of the Place, 20000 Men
and their Families were drawn from the neighbouring Countries to settle
there, so that the _Moors_ never after attempted it. They remain’d
under their own Masters till Pope _Adrian_ VI. annex’d it to the Crowns
of _Castile_ and _Leon_.


                 22. _Order of the Holy Ghost at_ Rome.

_Marquez_ calls them _Brothers of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost_, who
tho’ not invested with Swords and Spurs, are nevertheless reckoned
among the Military Orders, because bound to certify their Gentility
before Admittance. Their chief Seat is the Sumptuous Hospital of the
Holy Ghost, founded at _Saxia_ near the River _Tyber_ at _Rome_, by
Pope _Innocent_ III. _A. D._ 1198. or 1201. But the Ancient Foundation
was the Hospital of the _Holy Ghost_ at _Montpelier_ in _France_, tho’
this other became the Principal. They profess Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience, living under the Rule of St. _Augustine_, and have a Master.
Their Ensign is a _White Patriarchal Cross with Twelve Points_, sowed
to their Breast, and on the left side of their Black Mantle.

In this Hospital, Care is taken for the nursing and bringing up exposed
Children, curing Infirmities, Entertainment of Strangers for Three
Days, relieving the Poor, and the like Works. Their Revenue is about
24000 Ducats _per_ Day, having great Commandaries in _Italy_, _Sicily_,
_Spain_, _France_, _Burgundy_, _Germany_, and elsewhere.


                 23. _Knights of St._ George d’Alfama.

So named from a Town in _Tortosa_, were instituted, _A. D._ 1201.
received Approbation from the Papal See, _A. D._ 1363. and _A. D._
1399. was united to the Order of our Lady of _Montesa_.


    24. _Knights of_ Christ _in_ Livonia, _or of the Sword-bearers_.

_A. D._ 1186. _Mainard_ first preach’d Christianity to the _Livonians_,
and erected the Bishoprick of _Riga_; but his Successors meeting with
many Difficulties, _A. D._ 1200. _Albert_, then Bishop of _Livonia_,
instituted this Order in Imitation of the Knights _Teutonicks_, with
design to extirpate Idolatry, and promote the Gospel. He prescribed to
these Knights the _Cistercian_ Rule and Habit, _viz._ a long White
Mantle and Black Hood; on the Breast was the Figure of a _Red Sword_,
or rather _Two plac’d in Saltire_, whence they had the Title of
_Ensiferi fratres_, or _Brethren Sword-bearers_. Their Statutes were
something like the Knights _Templars_, and they vowed Obedience and
Chastity. Pope _Innocent_ III. confirmed this Order, which became fully
instituted, _A. D._ 1203. but because they could not of themselves
accomplish their End. About the Year 1237, they were united to the
_Teutonick_ Order, and submitted to their Rule and Habit, by whose Help
they overcame the _Livonians_, and brought them to the Christian Faith;
thenceforward the Great Master of _Livonia_ acknowledged him of
_Prussia_ their Superior, until _Walter de Pletemberg_, their Great
Master, separated this Order from their Obedience to the _Teutonick_.
Finally, _A. D._ 1561. _Gothard de Ketler_, the last Great Master,
following the Example of the Great Master of _Prussia_, became subject
to the Crown of _Poland_, surrendering to King _Sigismond_ II. the City
and Castle of _Riga_, and all the Lands, Charters, Privileges, _&c._ of
this Order, receiving in exchange the Dukedom of _Curland_, to him and
his Heirs for ever; so the Order expired after 357 Years continuance.


         25. _Knights of_ Jesus Christ _in_ Italy _or_ France.

ST. _Dominick_ descended of the Family of the _Guzmans_ in _Spain_,
instituted this Order, _A. D._ 1206. principally to fight against the
_Albigenses_, then call’d Hereticks. He prescribed to them a White
Habit, and for their Badge a _Cross flory, quarterly, sable and
argent_. The Work being done with the _Albigenses_, they devoted
themselves wholly to spiritual Warfare; and afterwards, upon admitting
Widows and Virgins into their Order, they became called _Fratres seu
Sorores de Pœnitentia B. Dominici_, whose Rule Pope _Innocent_ VI.
confirm’d _circa An._ 1360.


           26. _Knights of St._ Mary de Merced. _in_ Aragon.

_James_ I. of _Aragon_, being sometime a Prisoner to _Simon_ Earl of
_Montfort_ in _France_, where he suffered much Hardship, and being
moved with the insufferable Miseries the Christians endured under the
Slavery of the _Moors_, made a Vow to the Blessed Virgin, That when
delivered himself, he would endeavour the Redemption of such Christians
as the _Moors_ had made Captives, and accordingly laid up great Summs
for the Performance; and afterwards, by the Council of _Raymond de
Penafort_, his Confessor, and _Pedro Nolasco_, a Noble Chevalier, he
founded in _Barcelona_ this Order of _la Nueva Merced_, so named by the
Virgin, who, as they reported, appeared to them all in one and the same
Hour, directing the Institution. In _Anno_ 1358. I find it called also
_Ordo beatæ Eulaliæ_, from St. _Eulalia_ the Virgin and Martyr, buried
at _Barcelona_ in the Church bearing her Name. This Order began on the
Day of St. _Laurence_, in _August_, _A. D._ 1218. in the Fifth Year of
that King, which Day they annually commemorate. They were to gather
Alms, and go in Person to redeem Christian Slaves; which Work prospered
so well, that _Velasco_ (the first General or Head) set at Liberty 400
within the Space of Six Years after its Foundation. Their Habit was a
Coat and Scapular of course white Cloath, garnished with Cordons and
Ribbons, wherewith they fast’ned it about their Necks, and from the
upper-end thereof issued a Cap that covered half their Head: The Monks
wore their Coats and Scapulars reaching down to their Feet; but those
of the Knights were much shorter. _A. D._ 1251. King _James_, the
Founder, granted unto all the Fraternity, that they should wear upon
their Scapulars the Arms of _Aragon_, _viz._ _Or_ 4 _Pales Gules_, and
above that the White Cross of the Church of _Barcelona_ in a red Field,
with Two Coats joined together _per fess_ in one Shield, which came
afterwards to be encompassed with a _Bordure_, which the Knights wore
on their Scapulars, but the Monks on their Mantles, and both upon their
Breasts. Disputes arising among themselves, they were incorporated with
the Knights of _Montesa_; so that, ever since, the whole Fraternity
have been only Priests. The Master General hath his Residence at
_Barcelona_, by the Decrees of Pope _Clement_ V. and _John_ XXII. To
conclude, they now collect great Sums of Money, send out their Agents
yearly, chiefly to _Algiers_ and _Fess_, and for the Redemption of
Christian Captives, and have from the Time of their Institution
followed their proposed Ends with all religious Care and Faithfulness.


                27. _Knights of the_ Rosary _in_ Toledo.

_Roderick_, Bishop of _Toledo_ in _Spain_, seeing the Country sore
oppressed by the _Moors_, assembled the Noblest of the City, and
proposed the Necessity of their Assistance to extirpate the _Moors_;
whereunto they being unanimously inclin’d, he gave Beginning to this
Order. By their Statutes, besides fighting against the _Moors_, they
are obliged to say, continually, the Rosary of our Blessed Lady. Their
Rule of Living was that of St. _Dominick_; and their Ensign the _Figure
of our Lady of the Rosary upon a Cross flory, quarterly, argent and
sable_.


          28. _Knights of St._ Mary the Glorious, _in_ Italy.

Their Author was _Bartholomeo de Vincenza_, a Friar Preacher, or
_Dominican_, afterwards Bishop of that City. The End he chiefly
designed, was to procure Peace to _Italy_, then much disquieted by
Civil Wars. It was instituted, _A. D._ 1233. called _Generalis
Devotionis annus_, and approved and confirmed by Pope _Urban_ IV. _A.
D._ 1262. and the Rule of St. _Dominick_ prescribed them, who are
obliged to take into their Care Widows and Orphans, and endeavour to
beget Concord among such as are at Variance. Their Habit is a White
Tunick or Cassock, and a Mantle of Russet; some make their Badge which
they wear upon their Breast _a purple Cross patee bordered with Gold_,
others make it _a purple Cross patee, with Two Stars in chief_; but
_Marquez_, that has writ of the Order of Knighthood, gives it an
_Octogonal Cross_, like that of _Malta_. They profess Obedience and
Conjugal Chastity; but are forbid to wear Spurs or Bridles of Gold:
They are commonly called _Cavaleri de Madona_, and reside at _Bolonia_,
_Modena_, and other _Italian_ Cities; and because they have no
Monasteries, but dwell in their own Houses at Ease and Plenty, they
were called _Fratres Gaudentes_ or _Hilares_.


               29. _Knights of St._ James, _in_ Portugal,

WERE instituted, _A. D._ 1310. by _Denys_ VI. King of _Portugal_, in
honour of St. _James_, under whose Protection he became victorious in
divers Battles against the _Moors_, and at length quieted his Kingdom
by the Assistance of these Knights. It was not long after its
Institution ere this Order flourished, through the Privileges the
Founder bestowed, and the Approbation of Pope _Nicholas_ IV. and others
his Successors. The Knights profess Conjugal Chastity, Hospitality and
Obedience, and none are admitted till they make proof of their
Gentility by Blood. Their Ensign is a _red Sword_, formed like that of
St. _James_ of _Galicia_; the Habit White, and the only difference
between them lies in a little Twist of Gold which these of _Portugal_
draw about their Sword. At _Alcasar de Sul_ was their Principal
Convent, which they afterwards removed to _Dalmela_, where it yet
continues. Their Statutes, _&c._ are much the same with those of St.
_James_ in _Galicia_, whereupon some erroneously have confounded them.


      30. _Knights of our_ Lady, _and of St._ George _of_ Montesa.

THIS Order succeeded into the Lands and Possessions of the Knights
_Templars_ in _Valentia_, as the Knights _Hospitallers_ did into those
of the _Templars_ in _France_, _Italy_, and _England_; for _James_ II.
King of _Aragon_ and _Valentia_, refusing to give their Revenues to the
_Hospitallers_ (which as other Princes had done) gave them to the
Convent of _Montesa_, where had been placed both Knights and Friars of
the Order of _Calatrava_; and excusing himself to Pope _John_ XXII. _A.
D._ 1317. he instituted this Order in the City _Valentia_ (nevertheless
subject to that of _Calatrava_) and made choice of the Town of
_Montesa_, to give the Knights both Name and Habitation, whom he
obliged to defend his Kingdom against the _Moors_. Their College,
dedicated to St. _George_, was built the following Year, and their
Statutes confirmed by the said Pope _John_, who gave them the
_Cistercian_ Rule. Upon their Habit is White, and the Badge a plain
_red Cross_, which they wear on their Breasts. _A. D._ 1399. the Order
of St. _George d’Alfama_ was incorporated to it. And the Great Office
of Master hereof is in the King of _Spain_, who hath the Revenue of
Thirteen Commandaries belonging thereunto to the Value of 23000 Ducats
_per annum_.


                 31. _Knights of_ Christ _in_ Portugal.

THESE sprang also from the Ruin of the Knights _Templars_, whose
confiscated Estates King _Denys_, sirnamed _Penoca_, desired of Pope
_John_ XXII. might not be disposed out of his Kingdom, in regard of the
great Evils the Neighbouring _Moors_ in _Algarves_, did his Kingdom;
and forasmuch as the Town of _Castro Marin_ was a Frontier, and
commodious to resist the Enemy, he moved for Licence to institute an
Order of Knights therein, and offer’d his Holiness the Rents and
Jurisdiction thereof, which accordingly was granted by the Pope, and
dedicated it to the Honour of God, and the Exaltation of the Catholick
Faith, under the Title of the _Military Order of our Lord Jesus
Christ_, as is alledged from the miraculous Apparition of our Saviour
crucified, seen by the King when he went out to fight the _Moors_.


             32. _Knights of the_ Passion of Jesus Christ.

THIS Order was erected by _Charles_ King of _France_, (tho’ it made no
Progress) and our King _Richard_ II. with a large Design exceeding all
other Religious Orders, except those of St. _John of Jerusalem_ and
Knights _Templars_. They were to renew the Memory of our Saviour’s
Passion, to extirpate Pride, Covetousness and Luxury, to make way for
the Reconquest of _Jerusalem_ and _Palestine_, and for the Subversion
and Confusion of Enemies of the Faith. A MSS. in the _Arundelian_
Library, reckons up Twenty Causes for the Necessity of its Institution,
which are too long to be inserted; and altho’ it was dedicated to our
Saviour, yet the Blessed Virgin was look’d upon as a principal
Mediatress and Advocate of this Holy Chevalry. Their Governments in the
principal Convent, were to be debated by Five Councils, in the Presence
of the Prince: 1. The _Quotidian_ Council, consisting of Twenty-four:
2. The Particular consisting of about Fourty: 3. The Grand Council
consisting of Eighty. 4. The General Chapter held every Year. And, 5.
The Universal Chapter to be held every Fourth or Sixth Years,
consisting of a Thousand Knights of the Chevalry. The Principal Officer
was the _Grand Justiciary_, the next the _Grand Bailiff_: In the Chief
City, and in every City and Castle of theirs, one was to administer
Justice called a _Potestate_. In the general Chapter was to be an
Officer called the _Senator_, and in the Universal Chapter a _Dictator_
with Coadjutors and Assistants.

IN the principal Convent were to be Ten Executers of Justice, and Four
styled Charitable Commissaries, whose Office was, to provide for Widows
and Orphans; and whereas this Order was made up of Eight several
Languages, and as many Notaries, who put on the Habit of the Brothers;
for the greater Regularity of their Order, they were to bind themselves
by Oath to the Observance of these Three Points, Obedience to
Sovereigns, Poverty of Spirit, and Conjugal Chastity. They were
allotted for their Maintainance, the Possession of Cities, Castles,
_&c._ Gold, Silver, _&c._ and all to be in common, _&c._

There was to belong to the Castle or Principal Convent a Church of
marvellous Structure; it was design’d Fifty Cubits in breadth, without
any Pillars, a Hundred Cubits long, and in height Twenty-five; likewise
an Hospital, where the Widows of the Holy Chevalry should attend upon
the Sick and Infirm; a Baptistery or Font, for the Baptizing the
Children of the Knights; a stately Palace, with a great Hall and large
Consistories, to contain the Prince and Council with their Retinue;
with a large and delightful Cloister for the Canons and Clerks;
together with a very spacious Palace, to entertain the Princes of the
_West_ when they came that Way, either to War, or upon Pilgrimage: In
fine, there was to have been Three chief Halls, wherein they might dine
together; with distinct Lodgings and Habitations, Wine-Cellars,
Granges, Granaries, Stables for Horses and Cattel, Easements, Mills,
Cisterns, Baths, and all other Necessaries for the Chevalry. Their
Habit was to denote the Passion of Jesus.

THE Dress they were obliged to was a hansome Cloth Coat of a civil
Colour, reaching down half way their Legs, and girt with a large Girdle
of Silk or Leather Two Fingers broad, the Buckle of Black Horn, the
Tongue and Garnishing of the Holes, Tin; to have Red Chaperons or Caps,
representing the Blood of our Saviour; over their said Coats, a Mantle
of White Cloth or Serge, which from the Shoulders downward was to be
open on both Sides along the Arms, and in that Part before the Breast a
_Cross_ of red Cloth or Serge Two Fingers broad, extending to the
Breadth and Length of that Part of the Mantle; the _Cross_ of the
Prince’s Mantle was to be edged round with a Gold Fringe about half an
Inch broad; there were to be some other small Distinction as to the
Shape of the Cross upon the White Habit to be used by this Holy
_Chevalry_. Their Arms in a Banner were _Argent_, upon a _Cross Gules;
a Compass of Four convex semi-circles, conjoyning Four intervening
Angles alternately sable_ (in Allusion to the Agony of our Lord)
charged with an _Agnus Dei Or, the Compass and Cross both fimbriated
Gold, with a little red Bordure_.

IN Times of extraordinary Danger, and great Battles, they were to have
another singular and solemn Banner; every Knight was to have his
Esquire armed at all Points, a little Valet for his Lance and Helmet, a
bigger to carry his Mail, and a third to lead his Sumpter; Five Horses,
and Four Servants were to attend him in all Warlike Expeditions, and
Two or Three Horses and Servants in all Times of Peace. The Number of
these Knights of the _Holy Chevalry_ was 1000 or 1100.


          33. _The Order of the_ Brician _Knights in_ Sweden.

WAS founded, _A. D._ 1366. by an holy and famous Queen of that Kingdom
which they repute St. _Bridget_, the Aim of whose Profession was to
oppose Heresy, secure the Confines of the Kingdom, bury the Dead,
succour Widows and Fatherless, and to keep up Hospitality. Their chief
Ensign was a _Blue Octogonal Cross, and under it a Tongue of Fire_, the
Symbol of Love and Charity.


                34. _Knights of St._ Maurice _in_ Savoy.

THIS Order took its rise upon the Retreat of _Amadeus_ VIII. Duke of
_Savoy_, into the Desart of _Ripaille_, near the Lake of _Geneva_, and
was conferr’d by him, _A. D._ 1434. on Ten of his Courtiers, who
retir’d with him, as well as to preserve the Memory of St. _Maurice_,
the Patron of _Savoy_. Nine Years after its Institution, the Founder
was elected Pope, _A. D._ 1439. and assumed the Name of _Felix_ V. Nine
Years after that he resigned the Chair, and retir’d to his Solitude in
_Ripaille_, where he died, _Jan._ 7. 1451. and lies buried at
_Lausanna_. The Order continued not long after his Death; but Duke
_Emanuel Philibert_ restored it, _A. D._ 1572. and the Dukes of _Savoy_
are their Grand Masters.


                    35. _Knights of the_ Holy Ghost,

WERE instituted by Pope _Paul_ II. _A. D._ 1468. under the Title of
Brethren of the Hospital of the _Holy Ghost_, They wore upon their
Habits a _White Cross forme_.


       36. _Knights of St._ George _in_ Austria _and_ Carinthia.

THE Emperor _Frederick_ III. others say _Rudolphus_ of _Hapsburgh_,
first Founder of the Greatness of the House of _Austria_, instituted
this Order, A. D. 1470. chiefly to guard the Frontiers of _Germany_,
_Hungary_, _Austria_, _Stiria_, and _Carinthia_, and to suppress the
Insolency of the Turks, since which these Knights have gallantly
behaved themselves. The Great Master was advanc’d to the Honour of a
Prince; and the Castle of _Mildstad_ in _Carinthia_ was given him for
his Seat, where was founded a Cathedral Church of Canons, under the
Rule of St. _Augustin_. Their Ensign is the Arms of St. _George_, a
_red Cross_, and their Habit white; they profess Conjugal Chastity and
Obedience, and have the Emperors for their Protectors.

THERE are also _Cavalleros de San Jorge en Alemania_, an Order erected
by the Emperor _Maximilian_, 1494. upon the like Design with the
former; it was confirmed by Pope _Alexander_ VI. and is under the same
Profession and Protection as the other. There Ensign is a _red Cross_,
with a _Crown of Gold_ on the top of it; they were otherwise called
_crowned Knights_; for after they had served a Year, they and their
Heirs have a peculiar right of Adorning their Shields and Helms with a
Crown; the Occasion was upon a notable Victory obtained against the
_Turks_, who confessed that a Man on Horseback supposed to be St.
_George_, put them into that Fear and Disorder as to quit the Field.


                 37. _Knights of St._ George _at_ Rome.

THESE were instituted by _Alexander_ VI. 1498. or, as others say, by
Pope _Paul_ III. at whose Death it became extinct. They dwelt at
_Ravenna_, their Province, and were to secure the _Adriatick Sea_ from
Pyrates.


                 38. _Knights of St._ Peter _at_ Rome.

POPE _Leo_ X. _A. D._ 1520. instituted this Order to fight against the
_Turks_, and defend the Sea Coasts. Their Number was Four Hundred; they
wore the Image of St. _Peter within an Oval of Gold hanging at a Golden
Chain_.


                  39. _Knights of St._ Paul _at_ Rome,

WERE instituted by _Paul_ III. 1540. and while he was Pope, he made Two
Hundred of them. Their Ensign was _St._ Paul’_s Image hanging at a
Golden Chain_.


                  40. _Knights called_ Pios _at_ Rome.

POPE _Pius_ IV. erected this Order 1560. He created of them at first
375. but they encreased to 535. He granted them very considerable
Endowments, and preferr’d them before the Knights of the Empire, and
_Malta_, because they were his Courtiers, and had the Charge of
carrying his Chair on their Shoulders when he went abroad.


              41. _Knights of St._ Stephen _at_ Florence.

THIS Order was founded in imitation of the Knights of _Malta_, 1561. by
_Cosmo de Medicis_ II. Duke of _Florence_, afterwards first Duke of
Tuscany, in honour of St. _Stephen_, Pope and Martyr, the Patron of the
City of _Florence_, and in memory of the Battle on the 6th of _August_,
(St. _Stephens-day_) at _Marciano_, where overthrowing the Assertors of
Liberty, he laid the Foundation of his Grandeur. _Pius_ IV. confirmed
it under the Rule of St. _Benedict_, which was afterwards enlarged with
many Emoluments and Privileges, by the succeeding Popes. The Knights
vow’d Conjugal Chastity and Charity, in relieving the Afflicted,
Obedience to their Masters the Great Dukes of _Tuscany_. The chief
Place of their Residence was at _Pisa_, where the Founder erected a
Church and Convent, as a Nursery for Persons skilful in Maritime
Affairs, but since it is transferred to _Cosmopoli_ in the Isle of
_Ilva_. Their Habit is a long Mantle of White Chamlet trimmed with Red,
and on the left part of their Breast a _Cross_ (like that of _Malta_)
_of red_ or _crimson Satin border’d with Gold_; it is daily worn on
their Cloaks, and on their Military Garments, and about their Necks in
a Ribbon on Festival Days. This Order (like the _Maltese_) also
consists of Knights, Priests and Servants. The Priests wear the _Cross
of red Taffaty_ without a Bordure, the Servants the _Cross_ of St.
_Anthony_ only. The Statutes were reformed by _Ferdinand_ Duke of
_Tuscany_, Son to the Founder, and approv’d, 1590.


       42. _Knights of St._ Maurice _and St._ Lazarus _in_ Savoy.

POPE _Gregory_ XIII. having, at the Request of _Emanuel Philibert_,
Duke of _Savoy_, restor’d the Order of St. _Lazarus_, and the Order of
St. _Maurice_, _A. D._ 1572. and constituted this Duke Grand Master,
the same Year, for their greater Honour, he united them under the Title
of St. _Maurice_ and St. _Lazarus_, and appointed the Dukes of _Savoy_
Hereditaries and Masters, and oblig’d them to furnish out two Gallies
for the Service of the Papal See, to be employ’d against Pyrates. Upon
this Union, the Knights had assign’d them for Habit a Gown of Crimson
Tabby, with wide Sleeves, a long Train, and edg’d with white Taffaty,
and a Cordon with a Tassel of White and Green fix’d to the Collar. The
Badge is, _A green Cross ancree of St._ Laurence, _plac’d Saltirewise,
surmounted with the white Cross pornelle of St. Maurice_, which the
Knights wear either in a Gold Chain, or any colour’d Ribbon. And the
said Duke founded for the Knights two fair Convents, one at _Nice_, the
other at _Turin_, and bestow’d on them all the Revenues within his
Territories, formerly appertaining to the Order of St. _Lazarus_. The
Dukes of _Savoy_, as Grand Masters, use this Title.


                       43. _Knights of_ Loretto.

THIS Order, about the Year 1587. was instituted by _Sixtus_ V. who
erected the Church of our Lady at _Loretto_ into a Cathedral and
Bishop’s See, and gave the Knights for their Ensign, _the Image of our
Lady of Loretto_, hung in a Gold Chain. This is not quite extinguish’d.


      44. _Knights of the Blessed Virgin_ Mary _of Mount_ Carmel.

THO’ the Grand Mastership of St. _Lazarus_, and its Commandaries in all
Dominions, were confirm’d by Pope _Gregory_ XIII. upon the House of
_Savoy_, yet under King _Henry_ III. some Knights in _France_, of that
Order, refus’d to joyn with their Fellows, under the Obedience of the
Duke of _Savoy_. King _Henry_ IV. desirous to have a new order, bearing
the Denomination of _The Blessed Virgin_, &c. apply’d himself to Pope
_Paul_ V. and obtain’d what he su’d for _A. D._ 1608. (besides other
Pensions out of certain Ecclesiastical Benefices in _France_) the
Commandaries and Hospitals of St. _Lazarus_ in that Kingdom, and the
_Knights of St._ Lazarus that remain’d in _France_, were incorporated
with them under two Titles; their Seal being inscrib’d, _Sigillum
Ordinis & Militiæ Mariæ Virginis de Monte Carmeli, & Sancti Lazari in
Hierusalem_. The Order consists of One Hundred choice _French_
Gentlemen, whose Offices are to attend on the King in every warlike
Expedition. They vow Chastity and Obedience, and profess to fight
against the Enemies of the Romish See. The Feast of the Patroness is
the 16th of _July_; _Philibert Nerestang_, a valiant Knight of St.
_Lazarus_, was elected their first Master 1608. Their Badge is a Cross
of 8 Points of tawny Velvet or Sattin, with a white Border sow’d on the
left Side of their Cloaks, and the Image of the Virgin _Mary_ of _Mount
Carmel_ plac’d in the Middle, within a Rundle encompass’d with Rays of
Gold. They also wear about their Necks, in a tawny Silk Ribbon, the
like Cross of Gold; but the Image of the said Knights is enamel’d on
both Sides. There Investiture is like that of _Malta_.


       45. _Knights of the most Glorious Virgin_ Mary _of_ Rome.

_A. D._ 1618. _Pedro_, _John Baptista_, and _Bernardo_, sirnam’d
_Petrignaneos_ (three Brethren of _Spelta_ in _Italy_) invented this
Order: To which was added, the Rule of St. _Francis d’Assise_, whereof
the Popes are Great Masters. _Paul_ V. confirm’d them, and gave these
Knights the Palace of St. _John Lateran_ for their Convent, and the
City and Port of _Civita Vecchia_ to make their Arsenal; with an Island
adjacent, together with the Government of his Gallies. Their
Institution was for the Exaltation of the _Roman_ Church, and to check
or suppress the _Turks_ roving in the Mediterranean. There are three
Sorts of this Order, 1. _Knights Gentlemen_, Laicks. 2. _Knights
Gentlemen_, Priests and benefic’d. 3. _Knights Chaplains_, or _Servants
of Arms_. All of these wear on the left Side of their Mantles their
Badge, which is a _blew Cross floree Azure_, border’d with _Silver_,
having 4 _Mullets_, or _Stars_, at the End of each Flower, to signifie
the Four Evangelists; in the Middle is a Circle (extended round
underneath the Arms of the Cross) set with 12 Rays for the 12 Apostles,
inscrib’d, _In hoc signo vincam_; and within it (taking up the Center
of the Cross) is a Cypher of _M. S._ i. e. _Sancta Maria_, crown’d with
Chaplets of Flowers, and Stars of Gold set over the Chaplet.


 46. _Knights of the_ Annunciade, _and St._ Michael _the Archangel in_
            Mantua, _or of the Christian Militia in_ Moravia.

BY these Names they have been promiscuously called. It was instituted
1618. by _Charles Gonzaga_, Duke of _Mantua_ and _Nevers_, in
Conjunction with _Adolph_, Count of _Altham_ his Brother, and _John
Baptist Petrignan Sfortia_. To give it the greater Lustre, they divided
the World among them; _Charles_ took the North and West Parts, _Adolph_
the Eastern, and the other had the South, where they were personally to
found Convents and invest Knights. Duke _Charles_ began his Institution
of this Order under the Rule of St. _Francis_, in _Olmutz_ the
Metropolis of _Moravia_, the Year aforesaid, and dedicated it to the
blessed Virgin and St. _Michael_: But what Progress the others made in
their pious Resolutions, History is silent. It has been likewise
styl’d, _Conceptionis Ordo & Militis Virginis annunciatæ_. _Anno_ 1612.
several illustrious Princes of divers Countries entered themselves into
that Order at _Vienna_. It was approv’d by Pope _Paul_ V. and confirm’d
by Pope _Paul_ VIII. 1624. The Design of its Institution was, to
establish Peace and Concord among Christian Princes and their Subjects;
to release Captives, and deliver the Oppressed out of the Hands of the
Infidels.

On some unhappy Difference among the illustrious Founders, in a short
time it moulder’d away and became ineffectual, that the Mahometans (for
whose Destruction it was design’d) heard only the Report of it.




                               CAP. III.


§ 1. HAVING particulariz’d the Religious Orders, I shall proceed to
those accounted absolutely Military. Among them,


          1. _Knights of the_ Round Table _may, for Antiquity,
                       challenge the first Place_.

The Founder was _Arthur_ King of _Britain_, crown’d in the Year of our
Lord 516, at the Age of 15 Years; of whose incredible Courage and
Gallantry, tho’ some have stretch’d too far, yet _William_ of
_Malmsbury_ is of Opinion, he was worthy to have been celebrated by
true and faithful Historians, and not false and spurious Tales. He it
was that long prop’d up his declining Country, and inspir’d Martial
Courage into his Subjects, the _Saxons_, in twelve pitch’d Battles
having overcome, and conquer’d divers Countries. He liv’d in so great
Repute and Renown, that worthy Knights came from all Parts to his
Court, as a Seminary of Military Discipline, to demonstrate their
Valour in point of Arms. This gave him Occasion to select out of these,
and his own Subjects, some say Twenty Four of the most Valiant, which
he united in a Fellowship; and to avoid all Controversy upon
Precedency, caus’d a Round Table to be made, whence the Order had its
Appellation. He admitted not only _Britains_, but Strangers; and their
Qualifications were to be Persons of Nobility, Dignity, and renown’d
for Vertue and Valour. The Place where they were instituted was
_Windsor_; and those others of Note, where he and his Knights
assembled, were at _Caerleon_ in _Monmouthshire_, _Winchester_, and
_Camelot_ in _Com’ Somerset_; and their time of convening was
_Whitsuntide_. In _Winchester_ Castle was a large Round Table, call’d
(and affirm’d to be) King _Arthur_’s; or at least set up in the room of
one more ancient, which was destroy’d in the rebellious Times of Forty
One, with other Reliques there. The Articles of their Profession
(Number 12) are set down by Sir _William Segar_. We find no authentick
Proof what Badge they bore, notwithstanding the Report that King
_Arthur_ had a Shield nam’d _Pridwin_, wherein the Virgin _Mary_ was
depicted. His Sword and Lance had also their Names, one being call’d
_Caliburne_, the other _Irone_ or _Rone_. It’s not remember’d that this
Order surviv’d the Founder, but rather that it expir’d with him, most
of these Knights perishing with him at the Battle of _Kamblan_, now
_Camelsford_, in _Cornwall_, where tho’ he kill’d his Enemy _Mordred_,
yet he dy’d _A. D._ 542.

IT may be noted, that the like Round Table grew in Estimation
shortly after the _Norman_ Conquest, being permitted at Haslelades,
Tilts and Turnaments, _temp. Steph._ and _R. I._ And _Roger
Mortimer_, Earl of _March_, kept the Celebration of the Round Table
(consisting of One Hundred Knights, and as many Ladies) with
Tilting at _Kenelworth_-Castle, in _Com’ Worcest’_ 7 _Ed._ I. And
King _Edward_ III. designing to restore it, held a Just at
_Windsor_ in the 18th Year of his Reign; and in the 19th ordain’d
it annually to be kept there at _Whitsontide_. But it was thought
fit upon divers Accounts to forbid these Assemblies, and in
particular 16 _H._ III. at _Shrewsbury_, when the King went to meet
_Llewellin_ Prince of _Wales_, and in 36 _H._ III. and at many
other times.


                 2. _Knights of the_ Oak _in_ Navarre,

WERE instituted by _Garcia Ximenes_ of the Blood of the _Goths_, who
had formerly retir’d from the World to a solitary Life, but
relinquish’d it to command an Army rais’d by the _Navarrois_, to
deliver themselves from the Oppression of the _Moors_. As he was
marching to encounter them, _A. D._ 722. there appear’d to him from the
Top of an Oak the Sign of the Cross, ador’d by an infinite Number of
Angels. On giving Battle to the Infidels he gain’d a remarkable
Victory, and the People elected him their King; and he in thankfulness
to God erected this Order, investing his Nobles therewith, and oblig’d
them to defend the Christian Faith, and acknowledge Obedience to his
Successors, Kings of _Navarre_. Time has eclips’d this Order.


                     3. _The Order of the_ Gennet,

WAS Founded by _Charles Martel_, in Memory of the famous Battle near
_Tours_, _A. D._ 726. where he overthrew 385000 _Saracens_ and _Moors_,
with their General _Abdiramo_; and to reward those who had well-behav’d
themselves in this Action. The great Number of rich Gennet Furr,
(Ermine has since gain’d the better value) as also the Creatures
themselves taken alive among the Spoils, was the Occasion of assuming
the Name: But others impute it to Gennets, a kind of neat-shap’d
Horses, whereof not unlikely a great Part of the Founder’s Cavalry
consisted. The Knights were Sixteen in Number, and were accounted the
first Order of this Nature among the _French_, which continu’d till the
Institution of the _Star_, when it was laid aside, tho’ some _French_
Authors question if ever the Order was in being.


                  4. _The Order of the_ Crown-Flower,

ERECTED by _Charles_ the Great, Son of King _Pepin_, _A. D._ 802. to
reward the _Frizons_, who had behav’d themselves valiantly in his
Armies, and to encourage others to emulate their Vertue. It was so
call’d from its Ensign, _viz._ an Imperial Crown embroider’d with Gold.
The Knights were invested with the Military Belt and a Box on the Ear.


                 5. _The Order of the_ Dog _and_ Cock.

THAT there was such an Order in _France_ is related by several Writers,
but they give no certain Account of its Institution.


     6. _The Order of St._ Andrew, _or the_ Thistle, _in_ Scotland,

IS reported by _John Lesley_, Bishop of _Ross_, to take beginning from
a bright Cross in Heaven, in Fashion of that whereon St. _Andrew_
suffer’d Martyrdom, which appear’d to _Hungus_, King of the _Picts_
(and to the _Scots_ whom _Achaius_ King of _Scotland_ sent to his
Assistance) the Night preceding the Battle with _Athelstan_ King of
_England_; over whom prevailing, they went in Solemn Procession to the
Kirk of St. _Andrew_, to thank God and his Apostle for their Victory,
promising that they and their Posterity would ever bear the Figure of
that Cross in their Ensigns and Banners. _Favin_, in his _Theatre of
Honour_, relates it to be instituted upon the famous League, Offensive
and Defensive, made between _Achaius_ and _Charlemain_ King of
_France_; to preserve the Memory of which Alliance, _Achaius_ added the
_Tressure of Flowers de Lys_ to the Lyon, and took for Device the
_Thistle_ and _Rue_, which he compos’d into a Collar of his Order; and
for his Motto, _Pour ma Defence_: Yet doth _Menenius_ make these the
Symbols of two different Orders, one of the _Thistle_, whence the
Knights were so styl’d, and the Motto, _Nemo me impune lacessit_; the
other call’d _Sertum Rutæ_, or _The Garland of Rue_: Nevertheless to
both these Collars hung one and the same Jewel, _viz._ the Figure of
St. _Andrew_, bearing his Cross before him. _But there are some_, saith
the same Author, _that refer the Institution of the_ Thistle (the Badge
of the _Scotch_ Kingdom from the Times of _Achaius_) _to the Reign of_
Charles VII. _King of_ France, _when the Amity was renew’d between both
Kingdoms_. Lastly, Others place its Foundation 1500. Their principal
Ensign is a Gold Collar, compos’d of Thistles interlink’d with Anulets
of Gold, and pendant thereto St. _Andrew_ with his Cross, and this
Epigraph, _Nemo me impune lacessit_. Their solemn Meeting was annually
on St. _Andrew_’s Day, in the Church of the Town dedicated to his Name:
During the Festivity, the Knights were richly habited, and wore their
Parliament Robes, having fix’d on their left Shoulders an Azure
Roundle, charg’d with a Saltire Argent, or St. _Andrew_’s Cross enfil’d
in Centre, with a Crown compos’d of _Flower de Luces Or_. For the
ordinary and common Ensign, the Knights us’d a Green Ribbon, whereat
hung a Thistle of Gold, crown’d with an Imperial Crown, within a Circle
of Gold, containing the last nam’d Epigraph; and now of late they have
sew’d to their left Breast an Irradiation (like that of _The Knights of
the Garter_) over a Saltire Silver, the Irradiation charg’d with a Blew
Roundle of St. _Andrew_’s Cross. Their Number consisted of Thirteen, in
Allusion to our blessed Saviour and the Twelve Apostles.


                 7. _Knights of_ our Lady of the Star,

OWE their Original to _Robert_ the Devout of _France_, _A. D._ 1022. to
manifest his strict Devotion to the blessed Virgin. They were in Number
Thirty, inclusive of the Chief. Their Seat was in the noble and ancient
House of St. _Owen_, call’d _de Chichey_, near St. _Denys_ in _France_.
This Order was of no long continuance, for being much sully’d and
disgrac’d (during the Civil and Foreign Wars) by the Imitation of
Persons that had neither Birth nor Merit to recommend them, King
_Charles_ VII. took Occasion to efface it _A. D._ 1455. by delivering
up, in a Chapter, the Ensign that he wore to the Chevalier _du Guet_,
Captain of the Night-watch in _Paris_, the Lords and Princes throwing
it off after it had receiv’d that Mark of Infamy; tho’ some alledge it
declin’d upon the Erection of _The Order of St._ Michael, as the _Star_
supplanted that of the _Gennet_.


8. _The Order of the_ Lilly _in_ Navarre, _or of St._ Mary _of the_ Lilly,

WAS founded _A. D._ 1048. by _Garcius_ VI. King of _Navarre_, in Honour
of the blessed Virgin _Mary_, after his Recovery from a languishing
Sickness. Others relate, that prevailing against the _Moors_, he made a
Feast in Honour of the blessed Virgin, at which he instituted this
Order, electing his Brothers and Sons among the first Knights. It was
esteem’d the most Illustrious of all _Spain_, and consisted of Thirty
Eight Knights, extracted out of the ancientest Blood of _Navarre_,
_Biscay_ and _Old Castile_. The Kings of _Navarre_ were their Chief.
They promis’d, at their Institution, to expose their Lives and Fortunes
in Defence of the Christian Faith, the Conservation of the Crown, and
Expulsion of the _Moors_.


                9. _The Order of the_ Sword _in_ Cyprus,

WAS erected 1195. by _Guy_ of _Lusignan_, King of _Jerusalem_ and
_Cyprus_, after he had purchas’d that Isle of our King _Richard_ I. in
Commemoration of so fortunate a Plantation of 15000 Persons whom he
brought thither. Some question the Truth of this; however all assent,
its Founder was one of the _Lusignan_ Family. The Collar was compos’d
of round Cordons of white Silk, woven into Love-Knots, interlac’d with
the Letters S and R. Beneath this Collar hung an Oval of Gold, whereon
was perfigur’d a Sword, the Blade enamell’d Silver, the Hilt Gold, and
about the Oval this _Motto_, _Securitas Regni_. _Micheli_ says, _Pro
Fide Servanda_, and _Gothofredus, pro integritate tuenda_. Their
Festivity was _Ascension-Day_, whereon the Founder gave it (in the
Church of St. _Sophia_, the Cathedral of _Nicosia_ in _Cyprus_) to his
Brother _Amaury_, and to Three Hundred Barons establish’d in that his
new Kingdom. There were Eight Kings of _Cyprus_ of the _Lusignan_ Line,
Great Masters; but when this Isle fell into the Hands of the _Turks_,
this Institution ceas’d.


                    10. _The_ Bear _in_ Switzerland,

WAS instituted _A. D._ 1213. by the Emperor _Frederick_ II. in Favour
of the Abbot of St. _Gall_ in _Swaben_, who had assisted him in gaining
the Empire. These Knights wore a Collar of Gold, at the End whereof
hung a Bear Gold, mounted on an Hillock enamell’d with Black, in Honour
of St. _Ursus_ of the _Theban_ Legion, who was martyr’d before the
Temple of the Sun at _Soleurre_ in _Switzerland_. It was also call’d
_The Order of St._ Gall, from the Name of the Patron (a _Scotch_
Gentleman, and the Apostle of _Swaben_) of the Place where it receiv’d
its Appellation. The Abbot whereof, for the Time being, had Power to
confer this Honour, which was done by girding with the Military Belt
(the Sword being first consecrated) and putting on the Collar. It
continu’d ’till the _Switzers_ became a Common-Wealth; and then the
Castles of the Nobles being dismantled, it was laid aside.


                  11. _The_ Broom-Flower _in_ France,

TOOK its Original from _Lewis_ of _France_, to honour the Coronation of
his Queen _Margaret_, _A. D._ 1234. Their Habits were Cassocks of White
Damask, and Violet Chaperons; the Collar compos’d of Broom-Flowers
Proper, interlac’d with Flowers _de Lys_, hanging thereat a Cross
_Florence_ Gold, to which was added this Inscription, _Exaltat
Humiles_; the Founder accounting the Broom the Symbol of Humility.
Their Number was at the Sovereign’s Pleasure, and this Order continu’d
till the Death of King _Charles_ V. Some say _Charles_ VI. instituted
it, and others deny the being of any such Order.


           12. _The_ Ship _and_ Double Crescent _in_ France.

SUCH an Order was of Old, in Honour of the great Atchievements of that
Nation, tho’ by whom founded is unknown. _Favin_ affirms, St. _Lewis_
erected this after he had instituted the _Broom Flower_, to animate the
Nobility to accompany him in his Expedition to _Africa_, 1269. Their
Badge was alluding to the Name of the Order, the Figure of a Ship
Pendant in an Oval of Gold; and expir’d with St. _Lewis_ after the
first Class of Knights; but its Honour was kept up by _Charles_,
Brother of St. _Lewis_, and flourish’d in _Sicily_ with his Successors,
until the Kings of _Arragon_ obtain’d that Kingdom.


                13. _Knights of St._ James _in_ Holland.

THIS Order was erected by _Florentius_, Earl of _Holland_ and _Zeland_,
and Lord of _Friseland_; and he, _A. D._ 1290. bestow’d the Ensigns of
it, in his Palace at the _Hague_, upon Twelve of his chief Nobility,
among which was _Lancenot_ Lord _Hamilton_, Embassador from the King of
_Scots_. They were invested with a Collar of Gold, or Military Belt of
Silver gilt, set off with Six Escallops, whereat was hung the Picture
of St. _James_ the Apostle.


              14. _The Order of the_ Swan _in_ Cleveland.

IF ever any such was, it has been effac’d long since. Yet _Favin_ says,
the Princes of _Cleve_ have born the _Swan_ for their Order, Devise,
Crest and Supporters, to preserve the Memory of the _Knight of the
Swan_, whose Romance he sets down. And further reports, That _Charles
Gonzaga_ of _Cleve_, Duke of _Nevers_, had a Design to re-establish it.


                 15. _The Knights of_ Jesus _at_ Rome,

WERE instituted by Pope _John_ XXII. at _Avignon_ in _France_, _A. D._
1320. as a Temporal Prince, being Lord Paramount of St. _Peter_’s
Patrimony. _Paul_ V. much augmented it. Their Badge is a plain Cross
Gules, inclos’d within a Cross patee Or, hanging at a Gold Chain. Pope
_Clement_ IX. 1668-9. treated Three of the Embassadors from the _Swiss
Cantons_ with the usual Ceremonies, himself putting on the Chains, and
the Captains of his Guards girding their Swords about them.


                   16. _The_ White Eagle _in_ Poland,

WAS instituted by _Ladeslaus_, King of _Poland_, to honour the Marriage
of his Son _Casimire_ the Great, with _Anne_ Daughter of _Gedimer_ Duke
of _Lithuania_, 1325. The Ensign was a white Eagle crown’d.


          17. _The Order of Knights_ de la Banda _in_ Castile,

WAS set up by _Alphonsus_ II. King of _Leon_ in _Castile_, in the City
of _Victoria_, _A. D._ 1332. (or _Palencia_ 1330. or _Burgos_ 1368.
according to others) not long before his Coronation, the better to
secure himself against his Enemies. Soon after the Solemnity was
celebrated at _Burgos_, in the Monastery of St. _Mary Royal_, where the
Candidates, conducted by the King to the Altar, and depositing their
Arms, spent the Night in Watching and Prayer. The Morrow after Mass,
they were invested with a red military Belt or Ribbon, of four Fingers
broad, which came a-cross the Body over the right Shoulder, and so
under the left Arm, and was the Ensign from whence they took their
Denomination. This Order was chiefly to Honour the Nobility; and at
first none were admitted but the younger Sons of Noblemen [excluding
elder Brothers] or Persons well-descended, or Esquires, who had serv’d
in Court or Camp Ten Years at least. It was anciently of great Esteem,
and Kings have vouchsafed to take its Ensign; but at length it was
disus’d.


                      18. _The Order_ de la Calza,

INSTITUTED at _Venice_ _A. D._ 1400. from the Example of the _Knights_
de la Banda, in Honour of the Inauguration of Duke _Michele Steno_. It
consisted of a Society of particular Noblemen and Gentlemen, who
voluntarily met together, and elected a Chief among themselves. They
took an Oath to observe their Articles, part whereof was, the Honour of
the City, where noble and splendid Regales were made; and with such
like magnificent Divertisements did they entertain King _Henry_ III. of
_France_, and other noble Personages. It receiv’d the greater Lustre,
by the Addition of several Italian Princes; and the most conspicuous
Families were receiv’d into it. Their Habit, on Solemn Days, was a
Crimson Senator’s Vest appearing very splendid. Their Ensign, a Sun in
a Sheild painted in their Banners. It arriv’d to such Profuseness, that
in 1590. it was wholly laid aside.


                19. _The Order of St._ Mark _in_ Venice,

IS here reckon’d, because the Knights are dignify’d with a Title and
particular Ensign of Honour at their Creation. The Ceremony is after
the Manner of _Knights Batchelors_, by Dubbing with a Sword, and their
Title a bare Mark of Honour, having no Laws or Statutes, or particular
Obligations enjoyn’d. It had the Denomination from St. _Mark_ the
Evangelist, whose Body was translated to _Venice_, 828. and became the
Titular Angel and Guardian of that City, his Picture being display’d in
their Banners. The exact Time of its Institution is not certainly
determin’d. The Badge that adorns these Knights, is, a Gold Chain put
over their Shoulders at their Creation, whereat depends a Medal, on one
side whereof is the Symbol of St. _Mark_, _viz._ a winged Lyon, holding
in his right Paw a drawn Sword, and in his left an open Book, with this
Motto, _Pax tibi Marce Evangelista meus_. On the Reverse, the Duke
surviving is beautify’d with a particular Impress. Sometimes
represented on his Knee, receiving a Standard from the Hands of St.
_Mark_. This Medal is worn on a Cross enamell’d Blew. The Duke confers
this Honour, either privately in his Chamber, or publickly in a full
College. The Senate have the Power of creating this Order; and they who
receive it by their Sanction, the Dignity is greater than from the
Hands of the Duke himself. Absent Persons are invested by Letters
Patents; and to aggrandize their Honour and Title, style themselves
_Knights of St._ Mark.


       20. _The Order of the_ Seraphims, _or_ Seraphick Knights,
                     _otherwise sirnam’d of_ Jesus,

WAS begun by _Magnus_ IV. King of _Sweden_ 1334. in Memory of the Siege
laid to the Metropolitan City of _Upsala_. The Collar was compos’d of
Seraphims and Patriarchal Crosses.


     21. _The Order of the_ Sword _and_ Military Belt _in_ Sweden.

BY whom or when founded we have no Memoirs. The Collar made up of
Swords, with Belts twining round them (the Symbol of Love and Justice)
the Swords somewhat inclining towards the Point, and so joyn’d Two and
Two, Point to Point, plac’d round in a Circle.


                22. _The Order of the_ Knot _in_ Naples.

WHEN _Lewis_, King of _Hungary_, warr’d against _Joan_, Queen of
_Naples_; not so much to dispossess her of the Kingdom, as to revenge
his Brother _Andrew_’s Death, whom this _Joan_, his Wife, had strangled
1351. On the 26th of _May_, the Queen and _Lewis_ Prince of
_Tarantuni_, being crown’d King and Queen of that Realm on the same
Day, in Commemoration of so pacifick an Union, and to tear up all their
Enmities, the Prince instituted this Order; into which enter’d, at that
Time, Threescore and Ten Lords. Their Habit was White, and their Ensign
a Knot (the Emblem of Love and Friendship) intermixt with Gold. This
Order expir’d in a short Time.


              23. _Knights of the_ Annunciade _in_ Savoy.

_Ame_ VI. Earl of _Savoy_, instituted this Order, under the Title of
_The Collar_ 1362. in Honour of the Fifteen Divine Mysteries of the
_Rosary_. _Favin_, on a mistaken Ground, calls it _The Order of the
Snares of Love_, in regard its Founder had receiv’d of his Lady, a
Bracelet made of the Tresses of her Hair, plaited in Love-knots, and
that the four Letters, afterwards interlac’d by the Founder, should
signifie _Frappes_, _Entres_, _Rompes_, _Tout_. It is conspicuous
enough at the first Erection it was call’d of _The Collar_, and so
remain’d till _Charles_ III. or _Le Bon_ Duke of _Savoy_, bestow’d on
it the Title of _The Annunciation_, from the Picture of the
Annunciation which he annex’d to _The Collar_, 1518. The Founder
appointed the Number of his Knights to be Fifteen, among whom Sir
_Richard Musard_, an _Englishman_, is recorded 1434. and 1568. their
Number was encreas’d to Twenty, that being solely lodg’d in the Breast
of their Sovereign. _Riene_ Castle, in _Buger_, was their principal
Seat; they had a Chartreuse to entertain Fifteen Priests to celebrate
Fifteen Masses to the Honour of the Fifteen Joys of the blessed Virgin,
and to the Soul’s Health of these Knights; and here were their
Ceremonies and Chapters held, until _Charles Emmanuel_ I. exchang’d it
and other Places for the Marquisate of _Saluces_, 1607. on the
Anniversary of the Feast and Celebration of the Order (being fix’d upon
the Day of the Annunciation) were translated first to the Church of St.
_Dominick_ at _Montmeiller_, and afterwards by him to the Hermitage of
_Camaldule_, upon the Mountain of _Turin_ call’d _l’Eremo Assis_. The
ancient Collar was of Gold, Three Fingers broad; in barbarous
Characters were ingraved these Letters, F E R T, and one Knot (commonly
call’d the _Savoy Knot_) at the end of each _Fert_; which, with Three
other Knots entwin’d one within another, made up the Circumference
_pendant_ at the Collar without any Figure. These old Characters were
suppos’d to be the Initials of _Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenuit_, alluding
to _Amadeus le Grand_, who so valiantly defended _Rhodes_ against the
_Turks_, 1310. But that this was long before the Devise of the House of
_Savoy_, is manifest from the Coins of _Lewis de Savoy_, Baron _de
Vaud_. who dy’d 1301. the Monument of _Thomas de Savoy_, who dy’d 1233.
whereon was lying at the Feet of his Portraiture a Dog with a Collar
about his Neck, inscrib’d _Fert_, as an integral Word, and from a Brass
Coin of the said Earl’s, on the Reverse whereof are Two Knots of the
Model before spoke of, and the Word _Fert_ in the midst. There is the
Ectype of a Silver Coin of _Peter de Savoy_, (who erected in _England_
the noble Pile of that Name in the _Strand_, _temp. H._ III.) wherein
is represented the Devise _Fert_ in _Gothick_ Characters, the true
Interpretation of which Word cannot be explain’d. This ancient Collar
is still in vogue and daily worn, but now called _The little Collar_,
fashion’d of Gold or Silver gilt, about an Inch broad, and of different
weight. The Knights wear it about their Necks, close to the Collar of
their Doublet. Duke _Charles_ III. as he much restor’d the Splendor of
this Order, _Anno_ 1518. introduc’d the larger one, only worn upon high
Days. It weighs about Two Hundred Crowns, and is compos’d of the Word
_Fert_, interwoven with Knots, severed with Fifteen Roses of Gold,
whereof Seven are enamell’d with White, and Seven with Red, and
border’d with Two Thorns. The Figure of the Annunciation is enamell’d
in various Colours, _pendant at three Chainets_ to another
Rose-colour’d both White and Red. He first appointed the great Mantle
of Crimson Velvet, his own being furr’d with Ermines, but the rest of
the Knights with Miniver, fring’d and border’d with _Savoy Knots_ in
fine Gold; under this Mantle is worn a Surcoat of fine Damask. Duke
_Emanuel Philibert_, his Son, alter’d the Colour of the Mantle to
Azure, and lin’d it with White Taffaty, of which Silk he made the
Surcoats. _Charles Emanuel_ chang’d the Mantle into an _Amaranthus_ or
Purple Colour, seeded with Roses and Flames in embroidery of Gold and
Silver, and lin’d with Cloth of Silver tissu’d Blue, now in use; under
which, instead of the White Taffaty Surcoat, is now worn a White Satin
Suit embroider’d with Silk, the Hose gather’d upwards in the fashion of
Trouses.


                     24. _The_ Thistle _in_ France,

WAS instituted on _New-Year’s Day_ 1370. by _Lewis_ II. Duke of
_Bourbon_, upon his Marriage with _Anne_, Daughter to the Count
_Daulphine_ in _Auvergne_. The first Solemnities of this Order were
perform’d at _Nostre Dame de Maulins_ in _Bourbonnois_, where he
founded a College of Twelve Canons, in Honour of the blessed Virgin;
the Intent was, to corroborate his Interest for the Aid of the Duke of
_Orleans_, against the Faction of the House of _Burgundy_, and by
joyning of Flowers _de Lys_ and Thistles (the Symbols of Hope and
Courage) emblematically to express the Nobleness of his Spirit against
all the Power of Fortune. He ordain’d the Number of Knights to be
Twenty Six, comprehending himself and his Successors, Dukes of
_Bourbon_, as Chiefs, and oblig’d them to wear daily a Belt, a Girdle
of Watchel coloured Velvet, lin’d with Crimson Sattin embroider’d with
Gold, and therein the Word _Esperance_ curiously wrought. The Girdle
was fasten’d with a Buckle and Thong of Gold, bearded and chequer’d
with Green, enamel’d in Form like the Head of a Thistle. On the
Anniversary of the Festival (the Conception of our Lady) the Knights
wore Cassocks or Surcoats of Carnation Damask with White Sleeves,
girded as before; the Mantle of the Order was sky-colour’d Damask with
broad Welts of Gold Embroidered on the Collar, and lined with Red
Satin, but the Mantlet of Green Velvet, the Bonnet was also of Green
Velvet; at the Point of the Band hung a Tassel of Crimson Silk and
Threads Gold, the Lining of Crimson Taffaty, and turn’d up after the
antique manner, whereon they had embroided the Golden Shield with the
Word _Allen_; the great Collar was of Gold, of the weight of Ten Marks,
enamelled with Green, distended like Network, which was filled with
Flowers _de Lys_ (together with the Letters of the Impress) plac’d in a
Lozenge of Red Enamel; at the Bottom of the Collar, in an Oval of Gold
(the Circle whereof was enamelled with Green and Red) appeared the
Figure of the Patroness, the Virgin _Mary_, irradiated with Gold, and
crowned with Twelve Silver Stars, a Crescent of the same under her
Feet, enamell’d with Purple and Sky-colour; at the End of the Oval
depended the Head of a Thistle enamelled Green, but bearded White. The
Founder took an exact Patern for the Order of the _Garter_, with which
he acquainted himself while he was Prisoner in _Windsor_ Castle.


                      25. _The Order of the_ Dove

WAS begun by _John_ I. King of _Castile_ in _Segovia_, 1390. or, as
others, 1379. to encourage his Nobles to prosecute the Noble Acts of
his Grandfather King _Henry_ III. but the Founder dying the same Year,
before it had taken root, it became of small Continuance.


           26. _The Order of the_ Argonauts _of St._ Nicholas

WAS instituted by _Charles_ III. King of _Naples_, 1382. to preserve
Amity among the Nobles, to compose Enmities and suppress Seditions. If
any of these Knights, upon a Variance, refused a Reconciliation, the
Ensigns were to be forfeited. Others say the Design was to advance
Navigation, to which their Ensign alludes, being a Ship floating upon
the Waters in the midst of a Storm, having this Motto, _Non credo
tempori_. In the Convent of that sumptuous Church which St. _Nicholas_,
Bishop of _Smyrna_, erected, was the grand Feast held on the
Anniversary of that Saint. This King appointed a White Habit for the
Knights, and prescribed them laudable Constitutions; but for want of a
settled Revenue, their Splendor expired with their Founder.


              27. _Knights of St._ Anthony _in_ Hainault.

ALBERT of _Bavaria_, Earl of _Hainault_, _Holland_, and _Zeland_,
designing an Expedition against the _Turks_ and _Moors_, instituted
this Order, 1382. The Ensign thereof was a Golden Collar wrought after
the Fashion of an Hermit’s Girdle, at which hung a Walking-Staff, and a
little Golden Ball.


                    28. _The_ Porcupine _in_ France,

WAS erected by _Lewis_ of _France_, Duke of _Orleans_, 1393. to honour
the Solemnization of the Baptism of his eldest Son _Charles_, by his
Wife Daughter to the Duke of _Milain_. He chose the Porcupine for his
Devise, with this Epigraph, _Cominus & Eminus_; not only out of the
aspiring Hopes conceived of this Child, but also to intimate something
of Revenge against _John_ Duke of _Burgundy_, his mortal Enemy; the
Porcupine being an Emblem both Offensive and Defensive. Others make
_Charles_ aforesaid the Founder of this Order, 1430. in Imitation or
Emulation of the Golden Fleece, instituted by _Philip_ Duke of
_Burgundy_. Their Number, including the Founder, was Twenty Five; their
Habit, Surcoats of Violet Velvet, and over them Mantles of Watchet
Velvet lin’d with Carnation Satin; the Collar was formed of Gold
Chains, at the End whereof hung a Porcupine of Gold upon an enamelled
Hillock of Grass and Flowers, which Creature was also embroidered on
the Knights Belts.


 29. _The Order of the_ Lily _or_ Lilies _in_ Arragon _or_ de la Jarra
                de S. Maria, _of the Vessel of St._ Mary,

WAS erected by _Ferdinand_ King of that Country, called the infant of
_Antiquera_, 1403. and dedicated to the Blessed Virgin. _Favin_ ranges
it under the Denomination of the Title of the _Looking-glass of the
Blessed Virgin in_ Castile, instituted in Memory of a Victory King
_Ferdinand_ obtained in that Kingdom against the _Moors_, 1410. whence
he transplanted them with him into _Arragon_, 1413. when he received
the Crown, where it flourished under the Sons of that King, and then
the Line was extinct.


         30. _The Order of the_ Dragon overthrown _in_ Hungary,

WAS instituted, _A. D._ 1413. by the Emperor _Sigismond the Glorious_,
1418. for the Defence of the Christian Religion, and to crush or oppugn
all Hereticks and Schismaticks, and for the Satisfaction he receiv’d in
conferring Peace to the Churches of _Hungary_ and _Bohemia_, by the Aid
of the Council of _Constance_. It was in high esteem shortly after in
_Germany_; but the Order and Founder had very near the same Period. The
Knights wore daily, as their Ensign, a _Green Cross flory_, on solemn
Days, a Scarlet Cloak, and on the Mantlet of Green Silk a double Chain
of Gold (others say a Green Ribbon) at the End of which hung a Dragon
dead with broken Wings, in posture of being overcome (the Symbol of
Heresy) enamelled with Variety of Colours.


       31. _The_ Equites Tusini _in_ Bohemia, _or else both in_
                         Bohemia _and_ Austria.

THIS Order had its Name from _Toca_, a Cap or Coif. The Archdukes of
_Austria_ were its Founders; which they enacted to engage their
Subjects in Defence of the Christian Faith against _Turks_ and
_Hereticks_, conferring upon the Knights towards their Support
whatsoever they acquired in the Wars, which was a respite to
themselves, after almost Two Hundred Years Charges, and Military
Expence; indeed the Encouragement proved so good a Bait, that they
cleared their Provinces almost of all _Turks_ and _Schismaticks_ that
infested them. Their Badge was a plain _Green Cross_, and their Habit
Red.


                        32. Ordo Disciplinarum,

WAS instituted by the _Bohemian_ Kings, or rather the _Austrian_, to be
a Curb upon the _Turks_ and _Hereticks_, at least to prescribe the
Confines of the Kingdom. The Collar of the Order had a White Eagle.
These Knights flourished in _Germany_, in the Reigns of _Sigismond_ and
_Albert_ Emperors.


                  33. Orde de la Scama, _in_ Castile,

WAS instituted by _John_ II. King of that Realm, about the Year, 1420.
to excite his Nobility to fight against the _Moors_, which produced so
good Effect, that in a short time the _Moors_ were shamefully
overthrown. That King granted them Privileges, gave them their Statutes
and Rules; but upon his Death the Splendor hereof was greatly eclips’d.
Their Ensign was a Cross composed of the Scales of Fishes. They were
obliged to defend _Castile_ against the _Moors_, to dye in Defence of
the Faith, and when the King went to War they marched before him. Their
Ensign was a Cross composed of the Scales of Fishes, the _Spanish
Scama_ bearing the same Signification as the _Latin Squama_.


                 34. _The Order of the_ Golden Fleece,

HAD its Original from _Philip_ II. Duke of _Burgundy_, Sirnam’d _the
Good_, the 10th of _Jan._ 1429. at his Marriage with _Elizabeth_,
Daughter of _Portugal_, in the City of _Bruges_ in _Flanders_, to
perpetuate the Memory of his great Revenues raised by Wools with the
_Low-Countries_. Some say in Commemoration of _Gideon_, who with Three
Hundred Men vanquished a numerous Army of the _Midianites_; or of
_Jacob_’s _Fleece_, viz. the Party-coloured and streaked Fleece, after
the Example of _Jason_ and his _Argonauts_, whose Expedition to
_Colchos_ he intended to make his Patern by a Voyage into _Syria_
against the _Turks_. He founded it to the Glory of the Almighty
Creator, and Redeemer, in Reverence of the Virgin _Mary_, and St.
_Andrew_ the Apostle, who was Patron thereof, and whose Festival was
celebrated on that Day, but afterwards translated to the 1st of _May_,
by reason of the shortness of the Days, and the Fatigue aged Knights
would find to convene in an intemperate Season. The Knights at first
were Twenty Four, beside the Duke, chief and supream, who reserved the
Nomination of Six more at the next Chapter; but _Charles_ V. encreased
them, 1516. to Fifty. Duke _Charles_ and _Maximilian_, Sons to the
Founder, annex’d many Privileges to them, which were confirmed, 1556.
For their Habit Three different Mantles were ordain’d them at the grand
Solemnity; the first Day, of Scarlet Cloth, richly embroidered about
the Lower End, with Flints struck into Sparks of Fire and Fleeces, with
Chaperons of the same; and the same Day, after Dinner, to proceed to
Vespers in Mantles of Black, and of the Colour of Chaperons; the Day
following they were to hear Mass habited as themselves thought fit; but
Duke _Charles_ aforesaid prescribed them Mantles of White Damask for
that Day’s Ceremony, and changed their Cloth Mantles into Velvet. The
great Collar is composed of double Fusils, placed Back to Back, Two and
Two together, in form of the Letter B, representing it both Ways, to
signify _Bourgoigne_. And these Fusils are interwoven with Flint-stones
(in reference to the Arms of the ancient Kings of _Bourgoigne_) seeming
to strike Fire, and Sparkles of Fire between them, the Device of the
Founder, at the End whereof hung the Resemblance of a Golden Fleece,
enamelled proper. To the Flint _Paradine_ ascribes the Motto, _Ante
ferit quam Flamma micet_; and to the Fleece, _Pretium non vile
laboris_. The Jewel is commonly worn in a double Chainet or Males of
Gold, linked together at convenient Distance, between which runs a
small Red Ribbon, or otherwise it is worn in a Red Ribbon alone. The
Emperors of _Germany_ descended from _Philip_ Archduke of _Austria_,
Duke of _Burgundy_ and Count of _Flanders_, were the Sovereigns of it,
till _Charles_ V. gave the Guardianship of it to the Kings of _Spain_,
which he perform’d on the 25th of _October_, 1556. conferring it on his
Son King _Philip_ at _Bruxelles_, when he took the Collar from his
Neck, and with his own Hands put it over his Son’s Shoulders in the
Presence of divers of the Knights, with this Form, _Accipe, fili mi,
quem e collo meo detraho, tibi præcipuum Aurei velleris torquem, quem
Philippus Dux Burgundiæ cognomine bonus Atavus noster, monumentum Fidei
Sacræ Romanæ Ecclesiæ, esse voluit & hujusce Institutionis ac Legum
ejus, fac semper memineris_: Since which the Honour of being Chief of
this Order remains at this Day in that Crown.


               35. _The Order of St._ George _at_ Genoa,

WAS given by _Frederick_ III. Emperor of _Germany_, in honour of St.
_George_ the titular Saint and Patron of _Genoa_. The Ensign is a plain
Cross _Gules_, and worn by the Knights at a Chain of Gold about their
Neck. The Dukes of _Genoa_ are Chiefs thereof; and in regard their
Dignity lasts but two Years, the Order is much impair’d thro the
Inconstancy and Alteration of the Times.


     36. _The Order of the_ Croissant, _or_ Half-Moon _in_ France,

WAS erected in the City of _Anjou_, 1464. or according to the _Saincte
Marthes_, _A. D._ 1448. by _Rene_ of the House of _Anjou_, King of
_Jerusalem_ and _Sicily_, &c. Duke of _Anjou_, &c. The Intent thereof
was the Honour of God, Support of the Church, and Exaltation of
Knighthood; over which he declared himself and his Successors, Dukes of
_Anjou_ and Kings of _Sicily_, Chiefs. He also chose St. _Maurice_,
Knight and Martyr, for Patron, and held the first Ceremonies in the
Church of _Angiers_ dedicated to his Name. The Symbol which the Knights
wore on the right Side of their Mantle, was a Golden Crescent, whereon
in Red Enamel was this Word _L’oz_, signifying _L’oz en Croissant_,
whereby they were spur’d forwards to search after the Increase of
Valour and Reputation. At this _Crescent_ was fasten’d as many small
Pieces of Gold, fashion’d like Columns, and enamell’d with Red, as the
Knights had been engag’d in Battels and Sieges; for none could be
adopted into this Order, unless he had well trod the Paths of Honour.
The Knights were Thirty Six, others say Fifty, in Number. For their
Habit they wore Mantles of Red or Crimson Velvet, and a Mantlet of
White, with the Lining and Surcoat of the same.


              37. _The Order of the_ Ermin _in_ Britanny,

WAS erected by _Francis_ I. Duke of _Bretagne_, to perpetuate the
Memory of his Grand-father _John_ the Conqueror, or else in Imitation
of other Orders in _France_; and thereupon he new built his Castle of
_Ermin_. The Number of these Knights were Twenty Five. Their Habits
were Mantles of White Damask lin’d with Carnation, and the Mantlet of
the same. The great Collar was of Gold, compos’d of Ears of Corn in
_Saltire_, bound above and beneath with Two Circles of Gold, imitating
the Crown of _Ceres_, denoting the Care of Husbandry, and was sometimes
called _The Order of the Ears of Corn_. At the End of this Collar hung
the _Mus Ponticus_, or Ermin, passing over a Turf of Grass diaper’d
with Flowers, at the Edge whereof was imboss’d this Epigraph in
_French_, _Amaire_, the Device of his said Grand-father, by which he
made known his Courage; and rather than fail in the least Punctilio of
his Word, he would undergo any Misfortune. This Order ended when the
Dukedom of _Bretagne_ became annex’d to the Crown of _France_, by the
Marriage of _Anne_, Dutchess of _Bretagne_, to _Charles_ VIII. and
_Lewis_ XII. both _French_ Kings.


                38. _The Order of the_ Ermin _in_ Naples

OWES its Institution to _Ferdinand_ I. King of _Naples_, at the
Expiration of the War which he was engag’d in with _John_ of _Lorain_,
Duke of _Calabria_, 1463. being induc’d thereto by the Treason and
Confederacy of his Brother-in-law _Marinus Marcianus_, Duke of _Sessa_,
who design’d to murder him, and transfer the Kingdom to the Duke of
_Calabria_: But the Plot being defeated, instead of bringing him to
Justice, he not only pardon’d him, but instituted this Chevalry,
admitting therein all the Noblemen of Title and Figure in the Kingdom,
and generously appointed him one of the first Knights. The Collar was
of Gold, intermix’d with Mud or Dirt, to which depended an Ermin and
this Motto, _Malo mori quam fœdari_, alluding to the clean Nature of
the Animal.


              39. _The Order of St._ Michael _in_ Naples,

HAD its Original from the same King _Ferdinand_, in honour of St.
_Michael_ the Arch-Angel, Patron of _Apulia_. The Habit of the Knights
was a long White Mantle embroider’d with Ermins, and the Collar of Gold
compos’d of the Letter O, to which hung in an Oval the Epigraph
_Decorum_. By the Habit it seems to be the preceding Order, if that was
dedicated to St. _Michael_.


              40. _The Order of St._ Michael _in_ France.

_Lewis_ XI. King of that Realm, considering how his Affairs were
entangled, to re-unite the Affections of his Nobility to himself,
instituted these Knights, 1469. giving them their Denomination from St.
_Michael_ the Arch-Angel, the titular Angel and Protector of _France_,
in Reverence of whom their ancient Kings were wont to solemnize this
Feast-day with great Magnificence, and keep an open Court. Their Number
at first were to be Thirty Six, whereof the King and his Successors
were Chief: But it afterwards proceeded to Three Hundred. The Collar is
compos’d of Escallop-Shells of Gold, joyn’d one with another and
double-banded, fasten’d on small Chains of Gold, at the End of which is
annex’d an Oval of the same; and therein, on an Hillock, is the Figure
of St. _Michael_ combating and trampling down the Dragon. The Motto,
_Immensi tremor Oceani_. The Habit was a Mantle of White Damask hanging
down to the Ground, furr’d with Ermin, having its Cope embroider’d with
Gold, and the Border of the Robe interwoven with Escallops of Gold; the
_Chaperon_ or Hood, with its long Tippet, was made of Crimson Velvet;
but afterwards King _Henry_ II. order’d this Mantle to be Cloth of
Silver, embroider’d with Three _Crescents_ of Silver, interwoven with
Trophies, Quivers and _Turkish_ Bows, _semied_ and _canton’d_ with
Tongues and Flames of Fire; the _Chaperons_ of Crimson Velvet should
have the same Embroidery. Their Grand Festival was to be celebrated on
_Michaelmas-day_, at the Church of _Mount Michael_ in _Normandy_; but
after wards transferr’d to _Bois de Vincennes_ near _Paris_. There is
an Herald of Arms to attend this Order, called _Monsieur St._ Michael.
Upon the instituting _The Order of the Holy Ghost_, not only Care was
taken to preserve this of St. _Michael_, and to rectify it, but the
Knights had the Privilege allow’d them, that if they thought fit they
were made capable of receiving that of _The Holy Ghost_, which no
Stranger or Native could be enroll’d in that had taken upon him any
other Order. The Collar of St. _Michael_ may be worn with that of _The
Holy Ghost_, and it is now frequently us’d. The Evening before any
receive _The Order of the Holy Ghost_, he is admitted into _The Order
of St._ Michael.


             41. _The Order of the_ Elephant _in_ Denmark.

KING _Christian_ I. being at _Rome_ upon a religious Account, Pope
_Sixtus_ IV. among other Honours, invested him with this Order, in
Memory of the Passion of our Saviour; and withal ordain’d the Supreme
or Chief in his Successors, Kings of _Denmark_.

THIS King founded the magnificent Chapel of the Three Kings in the
Cathedral Church of _Roschilt_, (Four Leagues from _Copenhagen_) where
the Knights were to assemble upon the Death of any of their Fraternity.
He admitted thereunto divers Kings, Princes and Noblemen. Its chief
Ensign was the Figure of an Elephant, on whose side (within a Rundle)
was a Crown of Thorns, with Three Nails all bloody, in Memory of the
Passion. The Knights were oblig’d to Acts of Piety, Alms-Deeds, and
certain Ceremonies, especially upon those Days on which they wore the
Ensigns. King _John_ valu’d it so highly, that he wore them on every
solemn Festival. He advanc’d it to that Pitch of Grandeur, that our
King _Henry_ VIII. and _James_ V. King of _Scotland_, accepted it.

_Hertholm_, a learned _Dane_, in a particular Treatise of this
_Elephantine Order_, says, The Badge was meerly Military, anciently
given as a Memorial and Incitement to the _Danish_ Princes, who took
upon them the Defence of Christianity against the _Moors_ and
_Africans_.

HERETOFORE the Knights wore a Collar of Gold compos’d of castellated
Elephants and Crosses, something like the _Crosses ancrees_ (_Menenius_
calls them Spurs) at which hung the Picture of the Virgin _Mary_ to the
Middle, holding Christ in her Arms, and surrounded with a Glory of
Sun-beams. But that long since laid aside, they now wear only a Blue
Ribbon, at which hangs an Elephant enamell’d White, adorn’d with Five
large Diamonds set in the Middle. These Elephants, in the Reign of King
_Christian_ IV. had in the same Place, within a Circle, the Letter C,
and in the Center of it the Figure 4, denoting _Christianus Quartus_.

THIS Honour is usually conferr’d on the Days of the King’s Coronation.
_Frederick_ III. brought into use, in Imitation of _The Garter_, an
embroider’d Glory of Silver Purple wrought upon the left Side of their
Cloak or Vest, on which was embroider’d Two Crowns within a Rundle,
bearing this Motto, _Deus providebit_. The late King, his Son, chang’d
the Motto to, _Pietate & Justitia_; but all the Knights created by his
Father are oblig’d to continue the former Motto.


          42. _The Order of the_ Burgundian Cross _at_ Tunis,

WAS instituted on St. _Mary Magdalen_’s Day, 1535. by _Charles_ V.
Emperor of _Germany_ and King of _Spain_, after he had restor’d
_Mulleasses_, King of _Tunis_, to his Kingdom, to reward those
Commanders who had behav’d themselves well in the Victory. It was the
Day wherein he made his pompous Entry into _Tunis_, when clad in the
Coat he usually wore in Battle, whereon was embroider’d a _Burgundian
Cross_, which Cross he made the Badge, and added a Steel striking
Sparks of Fire out of a Flint, with this Inscription, _Barbaria_; and
for a more ornamental Decoration, gave a Collar of Gold, whereat hung
this Badge.


                    43. _Knights of the_ Holy Ghost,

WERE instituted by the _French_ King, _Henry_ III. 1578. to unite his
Nobles more firmly in their Obedience, to encourage them to persevere
in the _Romish_ Religion, and to illustrate the State of his Nobility.
It was so call’d by reason he was born on _Whitsunday_, 1550. elected
that Day, 1573. King of _Poland_; and on that Day, 1574. came to the
Crown of _France_. It was to consist of One Hundred Knights, besides
the Sovereign or Great Master, which Office is inseparable from the
Crown of _France_. A long Mantle of Black Velvet turn’d up on the left
Side, and open’d on the right, was also appointed for the Habit, being
at first embroider’d round with Gold and Silver, consisting of Flowers
_de Lys_ and Knots of Gold, between Three sundry Cyphers of Silver; and
above the Flowers _de Lys_ and Knots, were thickly powder’d Flames of
Fire. This great Mantle was garnish’d with a Mantle of Cloth of Silver,
cover’d with Embroidery made after the same Fashion, excepting only,
that instead of Cyphers there were wrought Doves of Silver, and both
these Robes double lin’d with a Satin of Orange-Tawney. The great
Collar worn over the Mantle, was at first compos’d of Flowers _de Lys_,
canton’d or corner’d with Flames of Fire, interwoven with Three Cyphers
and divers Monograms of Silver; one was the Letter _H_ and a _Greek
Lambda_, both double, for the King’s Name and the Queen’s, _Lovisa de
Lorain_; the other Two were reserv’d in the King’s own Mind. But these
Cyphers were taken off the Colour and the Embroidery of the Robes by
King _Henry_ IV. and for a Mark of his Victories, Trophies of Arms were
interlac’d instead thereof, with the Letter _H_ crown’d (the Initial of
his Name) whereout arose Flames and Sparks of Fire; and for the like
Reason the _H_ has been chang’d into _L_, both by _Lewis_ XIII and XIV.
At this Collar hung a Cross richly enamell’d in the midst, whereon was
figur’d a Dove in a flying Posture, as descending down from Heaven with
full spread Wings: And that an Epigraph might not be wanting, some have
attributed to it this, _Duce & Auspice_. Besides these Ornaments, the
Knights wear a Black Velvet Cap, with a White Plume; their Breeches and
Doublets are of Cloth of Silver, and their Shoes White ty’d with Roses
or Knots of Black Velvet. The Badges ordain’d to be ordinarily worn,
are a Cross of Yellow or Orange-colour Velvet, like a _Malta_ Cross,
fix’d on the left Side of their Breast, except in military Expeditions,
and then they are permitted to wear them of Cloth of Silver or White
Velvet, having a Silver Dove, and at the Angles or Corners, Rays and
Flowers _de Lys_ of Silver. They have a Cross of the Order made of Gold
(like the _Malta_ Cross) with a Flower _de Lys_ in each Angle, to be
worn about their Necks in a Blue Ribbon, and to be enamell’d White
about the Sides, but not in the Middle. Such as are Knights both of St.
_Michael_ and _The Holy Ghost_, are to bear the Figure of St. _Michael_
on one Side, and of a Dove on the other. The Anniversary is held on the
first Day of the New-Year, but the first Part of the Ceremony begins
always on the last Day of the Old, when it was instituted; and the
Place for celebrating thereof is the Church of _Augustin_ Fryars in
_Paris_.


         44. _The Order of_ The precious Blood of our Saviour
                       Jesus Christ _of_ Mantua,

WAS instituted, 1608. by _Vincentio de Gonzago_ IV. Duke of _Mantua_,
and II. of _Montferat_, for Defence and Propagation of Christianity,
and in Honour of Three Drops of Blood of our Redeemer; as also to set
forth more nobly the Nuptials of his eldest Son _Francisco_. It was
confirm’d by Pope _Paul_ V. and consisted of Twenty Knights, the
Founder and his Successors to be Great Masters. The Collar is compos’d
of Ovals of Gold, some extended in Length, others in Breadth,
alternately, and interlink’d with small Anulets: Those in Length have
these Words rais’d in White Enamel, _Domine probasti_; on the other in
Breadth is a Grey Crucible fill’d with small Rods of Gold, and placed
on a Trevet of Black Enamel over Flames of Fire, intimating, that they
who incorporated in this Society, should hold inviolable Faith and
Concord in the greatest Trials and Emergences of Life; at the End of
the Collar is _pendant_ a larger Oval of Gold, in which are figur’d two
Angels standing upright, holding between them a Chalice crown’d, in the
Table whereof are painted Three Drops of Bloods enamell’d Red, and
round the Oval, _Nihil isto triste recepto_.


                    45. _The Order of the_ Amaranta,

OWES its Institution to _Christina_, Queen of _Sweden_, about the Year
1645. in honour of a Lady of that Name, of great Beauty, Courage,
Modesty and Charity. The chief Ensign is a Jewel of Gold compos’d of
Two _A_’s, adorn’d with Diamonds on both Sides, and join’d together by
reversing one of them, being set within a Circle of Laurel Leaves
wreath’d about with White, and on the Four Sides this Motto,
_Dolcenella memoria_; which Jewel the Knights wear either in a Gold
Chain, or a Crimson or Blue Ribbon, as they best like of. His
Investiture is with this Ceremony: The Queen being seated under her
State, an intended Knight kneels before her, when she acquaints him
with her Inducements to confer on him this Honour, enumerating his
Services and Merits: This done, he takes an Oath, still kneeling and
holding his Hands between the Queen’s, to defend her Person from Harm,
and the Persons of his Brother Knights; to incite Justice, Vertue and
Piety, and discountenance its Opposers; after which the Queen puts
about him (in the manner of a Baudrick) a Crimson Silk Scarf with the
Jewel fasten’d thereto. To an absent Prince or Personage, she sends the
Jewel, accompany’d with her Letter, which supplies the Place of a
personal Investiture. Among many others have been several Kings and
Princes. Sir _Bulstrode Whitlocke_ has been elected Knight of this
Order.


                  46. _The Order of the_ Black Eagle,

WAS instituted by _Frederick_ King of _Prussia_, and Elector of
_Brandenburgh_, soon after he had the Title of King conferr’d upon him.


§ 2. 1. In the _West-Indies_, _Montezuma_, King of _Mexico_, set
Knighthood in the highest Splendor, ordaining certain military Orders,
with several Badges and Ensigns. The most honourable among the Knights
were those that carry’d the Crown of their Hair ty’d with a little Red
Ribbon, having a rich Plume of Feathers, from which did hang Branches
and Rolls of Feathers upon their Shoulders. They carry’d as many Rolls
as they had done gallant Exploits in the Wars; and the King himself and
his Sons were of this Order; which _Purchas_ calls _Eagle Knights_.

2. THERE was another Order, call’d _Of the Lyons and Tygers_. These
Knights being commonly the most valiant in the Wars, always bore with
them their Badges and Armories.

3. OTHER Knights there were, as _The Grey Knights_, not so much
respected as the rest. They had their Hair cut round about the Ears:
They made War upon their Enemies with Ensigns like other Knights, and
were only arm’d to the Girdle, while the most Honourable were
_Cap-a-Pee’d_. All Knights might carry Gold and Silver, be array’d in
rich Cotton, have the use of painted and gilt Vessels, and wear Shoes;
but the common People only the earthen sort; neither might they carry
Shoes nor Attire themselves, but in a gross Stuff. Every Order had
their Lodging assign’d them in the Palace, distinguish’d by their
proper Ensigns: The first was the Lodging of the Prince, the second of
_Eagles_, the third of _Lyons and Tygers_, and the fourth of _Grey
Knights_.

THE Province of _Cinaloa_ (near _New Mexico_) created their Knights by
giving a Bow, and setting them to encounter a Lyon or some other wild
Beast.

THE _Inguas_, or Lords of _Peru_, dedicated their Children to Honour,
by adorning them with _Guarras_ or Ensigns. They pierced their Ears,
whip’d them with Slings, smeared their Faces with Blood, in order they
should be true Knights to the _Ingua_. Those of Royal Extraction,
before they received the Order of Knighthood abstained Seven Days from
all manner of Nutriment, except a little raw Grain and Water, and after
being heartned and brisked up again, performed some Military Exercises,
also Racing, Wrestling, Leaping, Shooting, Slinging, throwing the Dart
and Lance, _&c._ and enduring to be beaten on the Hands and Legs with
Wands; these being as it were the Tests whether they could endure the
Hardships of War or no; for if they did not sustain them manfully, they
were denied Knighthood. The Ceremonies being performed by boaring an
Hole in the Ears, putting on gallant Shoes, and wearing of the
Breeches, which before they were restricted, adorning their Heads with
Flowers, and having the Privilege of an Herb that none but themselves
cou’d make use of, and lastly giving an Axe into their Hands.
_Menenius_ calls these Knights _Oreiones_, from the _Spanish Orejas_,
flop or loll-eared, in the _Latin Auriculares_, from the Leaf which
they bore hanging in their Ears, or because they only negotiated
Affairs with the Emperor, and had his Ear at all times.

IN _Japan_ there’s an Order of Knights called _Mengoras_, part of whom
are called _Bonzees_, living in Fraternities, as our Religionists in
_Europe_. Some of these have the Charge of their Idols, and the Service
relating to their Temples, others follow the Wars. They profess
Chastity with such Severity, that no Woman is allow’d to enter their
Cities. They govern the Kingdoms they conquer, and are so very opulent
that some of them possess 60000 Duckets _per Annum_; and have a publick
Armory well stored to make use of upon any Exigence, which is
maintain’d by a daily Contribution. Women have been excluded their
Share in this Way of Honour, tho’ their Courage and Valour have
equalized the _Amazons_ of old; the Example is of the noble Women of
_Tortosa_ in _Spain_, or the _Femme_ Cavaliers of the _Torchi_.
_Micheli_ barely calls them _Chavalleros_, or rather _Chavalleras_,
seeing the _Latins_ have had the Words, _Equitissæ & Militissæ_, to
express, _Virago’s_ and _Heroines_.

DON _Raymond_, last Earl of _Barcelona_, having in the Year 1149.
reduced the City of _Tortosa_ from the _Moors_, on the Thirty First
following they laid a fresh Siege to it, in hopes to recover it. The
Inhabitants were at length reduced to great Streights; they desired
Relief of the Earl, but he not being in a Condition to answer their
Request, they had Thoughts of a Surrender; which the Women to prevent
put on the Apparel of the Men, and by a resolute Salley forced the
_Moors_ to raise the Siege. The Gallantry of the Action the Earl
acknowledged by granting them several Privileges, and to perpetuate the
Memory instituted this Order, somewhat like a Military one, and none
were to be admitted, only those brave Women, and the Honour to derive
to their Descendants, and assigned them for a Badge a Thing like a
_Fryer’s Capouche_, sharp at the Top, after the Form of a Torch, of a
Crimson Colour, to be worn upon their Head-Cloaths; that at all publick
Meetings the Women should have Precedence of the Men, and should be
exempted from all Taxes, and that all the Apparels and Jewels left by
their dead Husbands should be theirs.

A more general Ornament of Honour peculiar to the Fair Sex is the
_Cordon_, which some will have to be an Order, or Equivalent thereunto.
The Institution is attributed to _Anne Britaigne_, Wife to _Charles_
VIII. of _France_, who instead of the Military Belt or Collar, bestowed
a Cordon or Lace on several Ladies, admonishing them to live chastly
and devoutly, always mindful of the Cords and Bonds of our Saviour, and
to engage them to a greater Esteem of it, she surrounded her Escutcheon
of Arms with the like Cordon; from which Example the Arms of unmarried
Ladies and Gentlewomen are usually adorn’d with them.




                                CAP. IV.

         _Of the Castle, Chapel and College of_ Windsor, _&c._


Having dispatch’d the several Orders of Knighthood, and trac’d them
from their proper Fountains, we come now to treat of the most Noble
Order of the _Garter_; an Order, that not only grants Merit, and
Honourable, and Valiant Exploits at Home, but what Imperial Heads and
Persons, fam’d for the Antiquity of their Race, or Gallantry of
Actions, have always esteem’d a further Advancement to their Glory
therein to be enroll’d. For the better Explanation, it will be
necessary to begin with the Description of the Castle, Chapel, and
College of _Windsor_. The Place claims no greater Antiquity than of the
_Saxons_, named by them _Windleshore_, and, as _Cambden_ conjectures,
had the Denomination from the Winding of a Shore thereabouts, as did
_Wandsworth_ in _Surry_, heretofore written _Windlesworth_. The first
authentick Notice is from the Donation which King _Edward the
Confessor_ made thereof to the Monks of _Westminster_, (as the Charter
expresses it) _For the Hope of eternal Reward, the Remission of all his
Sins, the Sins of his Father, Mother, and all his Ancestors, to the
Praise of Almighty_, &c. he grants _Wyndleshore_, with all its
Appurtenances, as an Endowment and perpetual Inheritance, to the Use of
the _Monks_ there, and at _Westminster_, that served GOD. Those Monks
enjoy’d it not long, for King _William the Conqueror_, in the first
Year of his Reign, being greatly enamour’d with the pleasant Situation
and Commodiousness of the Place, situate so near the _Thames_, and the
Wood fit for Game, invited _Eadwin_, the then Abbot, and the _Monks_,
to accept in Exchange for it, _Wokendune_ in _Essex_, a Mansion called
_Ferings_, with all its Members and Hamlets, together with Fourteen
_Sokemen_ and their Lands, and one Freeholder, and Three Houses in
_Colchester_, all in _Essex_, since which it has remained in the Crown.

The King being thus possess’d, forthwith built a Castle upon the Hill,
which, in _Doomsday Book_, contained half an Hide of Land, and is there
noted to be Parcel of the Mannor of [_Clivore_] _Clure_. This Castle
King _Henry_ I. rebuilt, and beautified with great Magnificence, and,
in the Tenth Year of his Reign, held his _Whitsontide_ there with great
State and Splendor. Shortly after, in a Charter of Peace between King
_Stephen_ and Duke _Henry_, (King _Henry_ II. afterwards) this Castle
was called _Mola de Windesor_, the Fortress of _Windesor_. Within this
Castle was King _Edward_ III. born, (commonly called _Edward_ of
_Windsor_) and was baptized in the old Chapel; and so great was his
Affection to that Place, that he constituted it the Seat of the most
noble Order of the _Garter_; and to embellish it the more, he founded
the College of the Chapel of St. _George_, and much enlarged, and
beautified the Castle.

For this Work he appointed several Surveyors, whom he assigned to press
Hewers of Stone, Carpenters, and such other Artificers as were thought
useful and necessary, as also to provide Stone, Timber, and all other
Materials for them. _William de Wyckham_ (who attained to be Bishop of
_Winchester_) was one of these Supervisors, and had that Place
conferr’d on him by Letters Patent, _October_ 30. _Ed._ III. And a
Grant of the same Fee was likewise allowed to _Robert de Bernham_, viz.
One Shilling a Day, while he was at _Windsor_, Two Shillings when he
went elsewhere about that Affair, and Three Shillings _per_ Week to his
Clerk; afterwards he was chief Custos and Surveyor of this Castle, of
the Mannors of Old and New _Windsor_, and of other Castles, Mannors,
_&c._ belonging to the King, to provide Workmen, and look after the
Repairs, and in those Mannors to hold Leets and other Courts, Pleas of
Trespass and Misdemeanours.

About the 34th of _Ed._ III. it is presumed the most considerable
Enlargement of the Castle was made, seeing there was then great Store
of the ablest Diggers and Masons impress’d, by virtue of Writs directed
to the several Sheriffs, with Command under 100 _l._ Penalty to send
them to _Windsor_ the _Sunday_ after the Feast of St. _George_, to work
at the Kings Charge, from whence they were not to depart without
_Wyckham_’s License, Security having been first taken by the Sheriffs,
and returned into _Chancery_. _London_ found Forty; _Essex_, in
conjunction with _Hertford_, Forty; _Wilts_, _Leicester_, with
_Worcester_, _Cambridge_, with _Huntington_ Forty, _Kent_,
_Gloucester_, _Somerset_, with _Devon_, and _Northampton_, one with
another, found also Forty a-piece. And because divers of these Workmen,
for Gain and Advantage, clandestinely left _Windsor_ to the Hindrance
of the Work, all Persons were forbid to employ or retain them under
Forfeiture of all they had, and likewise to arrest those that withdrew
themselves from the Work, and commit them to _Newgate_. _A._ 36. _Ed._
III. many of them being swept away by the Pestilence, the like Writs
were directed to other Sheriffs, under a Hundred Pound Penalty, to send
able Men; whereupon the Counties of _York_ sent Sixty, _Derby_ Twenty
Four, _Salop_ Sixty, _Hereford_ Fifty, _Nottingham_ Twenty Four,
_Lancaster_ Twenty Four, and _Devon_ Sixty. _A._ 37. _Ed._ III. The
noble Edifice was ready for Glazing, and of Twenty Four of that
Occupation impress’d for the King’s Service, Twelve were to be employed
at _Windsor_. In this Year and the next a great Proficiency was made,
and vast Quantities of Stone were amassed, dug out of the Quarries of
_Wellesfor_, _Newel_, and _Carby_, and other Places. From the 37th to
the 43d, the Building of the Castle was diligently pursued. We find no
Addition to this august Pile till his 48th Year, and after that Time
nothing more during his Reign, so that it is supposed this Famous Piece
for Magnificence and Strength was then chiefly finished, _viz._ the
Great Hall of St. _George_, the Lodgings on the East and South side of
the Upper Ward, the Keep or Tower in the Middle Ward, the Chapel of St.
_George_, the Houses for the Custos and the Canons in the Lower Ward,
with the whole Circumference of the Walls, their several Towers and
Gates, as in the present Posture they remain.

IN succeeding Times King _Hen._ VII. added that stately Fabrick
adjoining to the King’s Lodgings, in the Upper Ward. King _Hen._ VIII.
re-edified the great Gate at the Entrance into the Lower Ward. King
_Edw._ VI. began, and Queen _Mary_ perfected the Conveying the Water,
from _Blackmore-Park_ in _Wingfield_ Parish, into a Fountain of curious
Workmanship erected in the Middle Ward, which supplied all the Castle.
Queen _Elizabeth_ made a Terrace Work on the North side of the Castle;
from whence there is a pleasant Prospect down upon _Eaton-bridge_, the
_Thames_, and the adjacent Country. King _Charles_ I. _A. D._ 1636.
built the Gate at the East end of the Terrace, which leads into the
Park. And lastly, King _Charles_ II. greatly beautified and repair’d
the Fabrick, and furnish’d it with a curious Armory; and, in fine,
every Thing is so fitly disposed and ordered, that they are worthy of
the Notice of every nice and curious Traveller.

CAMDEN elegantly describes its Situation in Prose in this manner: _From
an Hill_ (says he) _that rises with a gentle Ascent, it enjoyeth a most
delightful Prospect round about; foreright, in the Front, it
overlooketh a Vale, lying out far and wide, garnished with Corn Fields,
flourishing with Meadows, deck’d with Groves on either side, and
watered with the most mild and calm River_ Thames. _Behind it arise
Hills every where, neither rough nor over high, attired, as it were
with Woods, and even dedicated, as one would say, by Nature, to hunting
Game._

And thus _Denham’s_ Muse pourtrays it:

         Windesor, #the next (where# Mars #with# Venus #dwells,
         Beauty with Strength) above the Valley swells
         Into my Eye, and doth it self present
         With such an easy and unforc’d ascent,
         That no stupendious Precipice denies
         Access, no horror turns away our Eyes;
         But such a Rise as doth at once invite
         A Pleasure, and a reverence from our sight.
         Thy mighty Masters Emblem, in whose face
         Sat Meekness heightned with Majestick Grace;
         Such seems thy gentle height, made only proud
         To be the Basis of that pompous Load.
         Than which a nobler weight no Mountain bears
         But Atlas only that supports the Spheres.#

This Castle is under the Government of a Constable, so call’d in the
Reign of King _John_, and has bore that Denomination ever since: The
Office is of great Antiquity, Honour and Power, but of small Revenue,
for it is partly Military and Civil; as Military he commands the Castle
and any Garrison placed therein, and is obliged to defend it against
all Enemies whatsoever; all the Prisoners brought hither are committed
to his Charge, and is answerable for all that is in the Castle to the
King, under whom he is Commander, as a Civil Officer. He is Judge of a
Court of Record held there by Prescription, for determining, by way of
Common Law, all Pleas between Party and Party, arising within the
Precincts of the Forest of _Windsor_, and Liberties thereof, which
compriseth many Towns; and all legal Processes issue out in his Name.
He is allowed a Deputy learned in the Law, who is called the Steward of
the Court of Record, and is Keeper of the Constable’s Seal of Office.
This Officer supplies the Constable’s Place as a Judge of the Court of
_Common Pleas_, from whose Judgment the Appeal is by Writ of Error
returnable in the _King’s-Bench_, or _Common Pleas_ at _Westminster_.
The Constable is likewise Forester and Warden of the Forest of
_Windsor_, which is an 120 Miles in compass. He hath under him one or
more Lieutenants at his Pleasure, and may imprison any Trespasser in
Vert and Venison Convict, having a Prison in the Castle for that
Purpose, named the _Coalhole_. He hath the Freedom of using the Sports
of the Forest, which is granted to no Person without his or the King’s
License, and signs all Warrants to kill Deer, (except what the King
signs) and is to fell Timber and Wood.

HE that was _Chastelain_ (the _French_ Word for Constable) in _William
the Conqueror_’s Reign was _Walter Fitz Other_, from whom the Family of
the Barons of _Windsor_ are descended, and the Earls of _Plimouth_,
bearing the Surname of _Windsor_, _Temp. Car._ II. Prince _Rupert_ was
Constable.

WE come next to the Chapel of St. _George_, which is situate in the
Lower Ward or Court of this Castle, and so named by King _Edw._ III.
shortly after he had founded the College mention’d in the next Section;
he having pulled down the old Chapel erected there by King _Henry_ I.
and dedicated to King _Edward the Confessor_, to raise a more stately
Structure in its stead; to bring which Matter to Perfection, in the
24th Year of his Reign, _John de Spoulee_ had the Office of Master of
the Stone-Hewers, and had Power to provide Masons, and other
Artificers, to whose Care they were entrusted. In _Anno_ 25. _Ed._ I.
_John de Dorchester_, Sub-Constable of the Castle, was appointed to
keep a Controul upon all the Provisions bought for the Works of the
Chapel, as well as on the Payments, and all other Affairs relating
thereunto. To this Fabrick he erected several Houses adjoining, for the
Custos and Canons to reside in; and afterwards King _Hen._ IV. gave
them the void Place in the Castle call’d the _Woodhall_, nigh the great
Hall, for building of Houses and Apartments for the Vicars, Clerks, and
Choristers, and the other Ministers, assigned for the Service of the
Chapel; but King _Edw._ IV. observing the Walls and Foundation of the
Chapel sapped and consumed, and esteeming the Fabrick not stately or
spacious enough, designed another more noble and excellent in its Room:
In order to it _Richard Beauchamp_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, was
constituted Master and Surveyor of the Work, who had Power from the
King to remove all Impediments, demolished divers of the Officiary
Houses, and other irregular Piles and decay’d Walls, and dug up their
Foundations, particularly those ancient Buildings on the East side of
the Chapel, which extended unto the Walls on the North side of the
Castle, where the Towers, _viz._ _Clurey_’s Tower, and _Le Amenery_’s
Tower, and _Barney_’s Tower, were situated; as also on the South side
of the Chapel, unto the Belfry there, exclusively; the Materials
whereof he might bestow upon any Buildings in the Castle, as he thought
convenient. How well the Bishop discharged this Office, appears from
the Preamble of his Patent, whereby that King conferred on him the
Chancellorship of the _Garter_, in which is set forth, _That out of
meer Love towards the Order, he had given himself the Leisure daily to
attend the Advancement and Progress of this goodly Fabrick_.

FROM this Erection of K. _Ed._ IV. arose the elegant and beauteous
Structure now standing, enlarged in Length at least an Hundred Fathom
(tho’ it did not arrive to its Perfection until the Reign of King
_Henry_ VIII.) together with the Dean and Canons Houses on the North
side of the Chapel, and those of the Petty Canons raised at the West
End, in form of a Fetter-lock (one of King _Edward_ the IVth’s Badges)
and so vulgarly call’d. _Temp. Henry_ VII. Sir _Reginald Bray_, Knight
of the _Garter_, became a liberal Benefactor, finishing the Body of the
Chapel, and rearing the Middle Chapel on the South thereof, which still
retains his Name, and where his Body lies interred, as is manifest by
his Arms, Badges, _&c._ cut in Stone, and by his last Will. _Anno_ 21.
_Hen._ VII. _John Hylmer_ and _William Vertue_, Free Masons, undertook
the Vaulting the Roof of the Choir (a curious Piece of Architecture)
for 700 _l._ and finish’d it by _Christmas_, 1508. _Anno_ 8 _Henry_
VIII. the Rood Loft, and Lanthorn, were erected, with the Contributions
raised by the Knights Companions. Near to the East end of this Chapel,
was a little Fabrick of Free-Stone, raised by Cardinal _Wolsey_, call’d
the _Tomb House_, in the Middle whereof he designed to erect a Monument
for King _Henry_ VIII. and had almost finished it before he died; but
this was demolished, 1646. by command of the _Long Parliament_; and all
the Copper Figures, exceedingly enriched by Art, carry’d thence. This
Place King _Charles_ I. intended to enlarge, for the Interment of his
own Royal Body, and those of his Successors; but those villainous Times
drawn on, they with much ado afforded him but a mean obscure Place near
the first high Place in the Choir of this Chapel, in the same Vault
where the Bodies of King _Henry_ VIII. and his last Queen yet remain.

IN this Chapel, besides many of the Knights Companions, repose the Body
of King _Hen._ VI. removed from _Chertsey_ Abbey in _Surrey_, deposited
under the Uppermost Arch at the South side of the Altar, without any
Monument or Inscription, and likewise that of King _Edw._ IV. under a
large Stone of Tuch, raised within the opposite Arch, at the North side
of the Altar, but without Inscription, having on the outside of his
Grave a Range of Steel gilt, to inclose it from the North Isles, cut
excellent well in Church-work.

OVER this Arch hung this King’s Coat of Mail, cover’d over with Crimson
Velvet, and thereon the Arms of _England_ and _France_ quarter’d and
richly embroider’d with Pearl and Gold, interwoven with divers Rubies;
which Trophy had remain’d over his Monument ever since his Interment,
till plunder’d by Captain _Fogg_, 1642. who at the same time
sacrilegiously robb’d the Chapel of all its Altar-Plate.

WITHIN this Chapel were several Chantries endow’d with Lands and other
Revenues, for Chaplains and Priests to sing Masses for the Souls of
their Founder’s Kindred.

_William_ of _Wickham_, Bishop of _Winchester_, in 3 _Hen._ IV. gave
Two Hundred Marks to the Dean and Chapter, to buy Twenty Marks _per
Annum_ to maintain one Chaplain.

18 _Ed._ IV. The Feoffees of _Richard_, Duke of _Glocester_, gave the
Mannors of _Bentfieldbury_ in _Essex_, _Knapton_ in _Norfolk_, and
_Chetlesworth_ in _Suffolk_, for a daily Mass.

22 _Ed._ IV. Sir _Thomas St. Leger_ founded a Chantry of Two Priests,
who were to officiate in the middle Chapel on the North Side of the
Church; and the said King, by his Will, ordain’d Two Priests to serve
at his Tomb, with an Exhibition of Twenty Marks yearly a-piece.

9 _Hen._ VII. There was another Chantry Priest assign’d for _Thomas
Pasche_ and _William Hermer_, &c. who was to perform his Office at the
Altar on the North Side the new Church.

13 _Hen._ VII. _Margaret_, Countess of _Richmond_, founded a Chantry
for Four Chaplains, to celebrate Mass in the East Part of the new Work
of the Chapel.

18 _Hen._ VII. _William_, Lord _Hastings_, founded a Chantry for One
Priest, on the North Side of the Choir, about the middle whereof this
Lord lies.

21 _Hen._ VII. _Charles Somerset_, Lord _Herbert_, (afterwards Earl of
_Worcester_) left a Secular Priest for a daily Mass, _&c._ to be said
in the South Chapel dedicated to the Virgin _Mary_, where he lies
interr’d. Both these Lords have built Appartments adjoyning for their
Chantry Priests, now to be seen and distinguish’d by their Arms,
garter’d and cut in Stone over their several Doors.

TO these we shall add the Foundation of the new Commons, erected over
against the North Door of the Body of St. _George_’s Chapel, by _James
Denton_ one of the Canons, _Anno_ 11 _Hen._ VIII. for the Lodging and
Dieting such of the Chantry Priests, Choristers and stipendiary
Priests, who had before no certain Place where to hold Commons in,
which he furnish’d with all proper Utensils, the Charge amounting to
489 _l._ 7 _s._ 1 _d._ in lieu of which the Choristers were to say
certain Prayers when they enter’d the Chapel, commemorate his Death,
and pray for his and the Souls of all the Faithful departed.

IN this Chapel of St. _George_ there were heretofore several
Anniversaries or Obits held and celebrated, which we pass over. And as
it was usual for some of the military Profession to spend the Remains
of their Lives in pious Speculations, for their King and Country, and
the Salvation of their own Souls, Permission was allow’d to the
well-dispos’d _Knights of the Garter_, who retir’d from the Noise and
Bustle of the World, to make their Abode there; yet so as to maintain
themselves out of their own Revenues. King _Henry_ VIII. ordain’d that
the Sovereign should assign them convenient Appartments within the
Castle; and the like Favour he granted to other Knights, tho’ not of
the Order; but the Lodgings to be such as the Sovereign and Knights
Companions should decree: However, we do not find the Knights
Companions made use of the Benefit, but only for their better
Accommodation at the grand Feast of the Order, _&c._ A Motion was made,
14 _Car._ I. that they might have Lodgings assign’d them in the great
Court, which they offer’d to repair at their own Charge, since all the
Officers had Conveniencies in the Castle, but the Knights Companions
none, which the King did not dissent to, provided it be without
Exclusion of the great Officers of State.

§ 3. WITHIN the Chapel of the Castle, erected by King _Henry_ I. was
founded a College for Eight Canons, to be maintain’d by an annual
Pension out of the Exchequer. King _Edw._ II. founded here a Chantry
for Four Chaplains and Two Clerks; as likewise a Chapel in the Park of
_Windsor_, under the same Regulation, for Four more Chaplains, whom
King _Edw._ III. remov’d and joyn’d to those before settled in the
Chapel of the Castle, and built Habitations for their better
Accommodation, on the South Side thereof.

THE Foundation we treated of here was confirm’d by Letters Patent,
dated at _Westminster_, _Aug._ 6. 22 _Edw._ III. three Quarters of a
Year before he erected _The Order of the Garter_, when he laid the
Foundation of the ancient Chapel a-fresh, in honour of God, the Virgin
_Mary_, St. _George_ and St. _Edward the Confessor_; and ordain’d, that
to King _Henry_’s Eight Canons there should be annex’d One Custos,
Fifteen more Canons, and Twenty Four Alms-Knights, together with other
Ministers, all under the Power of the Custos, and these to be supported
out of the Revenues wherewith this Chapel should be endow’d: Upon which
Pope _Clement_ VI. 1351. by his Bull directed to the Arch-bishop of
_Canterbury_ and Bishop of _Winchester_, approved in part the King’s
Intention.

THE next Year the Statutes and Ordinances of the College commenc’d, by
Virtue of the Pope’s Authority, the King’s Command, and Consent of the
Bishop of _Salisbury_, in whose Diocess the Chapel is situate. By which
Statutes, _Winchester_ (one of the Pope’s Delegates) instituted a
College, within the Precincts of the Chapel of St. _George_, consisting
of one Custos, Twelve Secular Canons, Thirteen Priests or Vicars, Four
Clerks, Six Choristers, and Twenty Six Alms-Knights, besides other
Officers.


                                 DEAN.

§ 4. THE first Custos was _John de la Chambre_, constituted Nov. 14. 22
_Edw._ III. to whom succeeded _William Mugg_, on the 18th of June
following: Which _Mugg_ is the first, if the Institution of the College
bears Date by Papal, and not Kingly Authority. After him were others
that were call’d by the same Title; till the last Year of King _Henry_
IV. when _Thomas Kingston_ was presented by the Name of Dean; and his
Successor, _John Arundel_, observing divers Endowments granted to the
College alternately, by the Name of Custos, Dean and Custos, or lastly
of Dean only; and doubting this Variation of Titles in Time might bring
Inconveniences upon the Foundation, petition’d the Parliament, 8 _Hen._
VI. whereupon the King, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal, granted
that the said _John_ should be _Custos sive Decanus_ for Life, and his
Successors _Custodes sive Decani_, Wardens or Deans of the Free Chapel
of St. _George_, within the Castle of _Windsor_; and that the Custos,
or Dean and Canons thereof, and their Successors, by that Appellation,
should have and hold, to them and their Successors for ever, all Lands,
Tenements, _&c._ Liberties, _&c._ devolv’d upon the College at any Time
before: So that here was a kind of new Incorporation, by the Title of
Custos, or Deans and Canons only; at least this was a great Step to
compleat the Privilege they after enjoy’d, when thro’ the Interest of
_Richard Beauchamp_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, then also Dean of
_Windsor_, and Chancellor of the Order, King _Edw._ IV. by Letters
Patent dated _Dec._ 6. in the 19th Year of his Reign, model’d them by
the Name of Dean and Canons of the Free Chapel of St. _George_ within
the Castle of _Windsor_, one Body corporate in Thing and Name, with a
perpetual Succession, and capable in Law to purchase, receive and take
Lands, _&c._ in Fee and Perpetuity; to have a common Seal, and might
plead and be impleaded by that Name; and for better Security, the
Letters Patent of Incorporation were, within Three Years after, pass’d
into an Act of Parliament now in force.

THE Authority of the Custos or Dean consists in being President over
the rest of the College; to govern, direct and order them their Goods
and Estates. He has all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over
them, with a Reservation of Power of Appeal to the Chancellor of
_England_, who is Visitor of that College.

WHEN any Persons lead Lives inordinate, he with the Chapter (in Cases
where no particular Penalty is appointed) may reprehend or correct at
Discretion; and in Matters of Discord, shall within Eight Days
reconcile the contending Parties, or do Justice. After thrice
Admonition, may expel from the College all Sowers of Discord,
Backbiters and Whisperers, that are below the Degree of a Canon. And
that there be no defect of Government, when the Dean has Occasion to be
absent above Eight Days, he shall appoint One of the Canon Residents
for his Deputy, in whose absence he has the Title of Lieutenant, and on
all Occasions to exercise his Office; for the Statutes allow him Sixty
Days in a Year for Non-residence; which space the Royal Visitation,
1552. enlarg’d to One Hundred and Ten Days; and the Lord Chancellor
_Hyde_ granted him Liberty of Six Weeks absence. But in the Vacancy of
the Custos, the Chapter has all his Power conferr’d on them; which
Chapter ought, within Two Days after the Vacancy made known, elect one
of the Resident Canons, under the Title of President, to govern the
College until they be provided of another Custos.


                                CANONS.

THE Canons, by the Letters Patent of the first Erection, were appointed
to be Twenty Four, including the Custos; but upon the Institution of
the College by the Bishop of _Winton_, there was ordain’d, as
afore-noted, One Custos, Twelve Secular Canons, and Thirteen Priests or
Vicars, in all Twenty Six, compleatly the Number of _The Knights of the
Garter_: And for a fuller Distinction between these Canons Secular and
the Priests, the first Twelve are, in a Bull of Pope _Innocent_ VIII.
nam’d _Majores Canonici_, the others _Minores_, or Petty-Canons. To
these Twelve Seculars were assign’d so many Prebendships in the Chapel
of St. _George_ (as also Stalls in the Choir and Place in the Chapter)
together with that held by the Custos, whence they are frequently
styl’d Prebends, and have a sacerdotal Power; for if they are not in
full Orders before they are instal’d, they must, within a Year after
they have enjoy’d their Prebendship, be ordain’d a Priest, or quit the
Benefice.

BY the Bull of Pope _Clement_ VI. the Right of presenting the Canons,
Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights and other Ministers, were reserv’d to the
Founder and his Successors; yet we find the first Canons were presented
to the Custos, by the Founders of _The Order of the Garter_ _viz._ the
Twenty Five first Knights Companions, every one presenting singularly;
yet this was but with the Sovereign’s Permission, _Pro hac vice_; and
that none of them should be entitled to it hereafter but the Sovereign
alone. And because it might the more effectually be observ’d, the
Custos was oblig’d upon every Canon’s Death, to signify the same to the
Sovereign, that he might pitch on One to succeed; which being
nominated, he is approved, instituted, and instal’d, by the Custos or
Dean, to whom he swears Canonical Obedience, and Observance of the
Statutes.

THE principal Duty of these Canons (and of all the other Ministers of
the College) is continually to attend upon the Service of God in the
Chapel of St. _George_; and the Statutes run upon each Day’s Omission
of a Canon Resident, to be mulcted his _quotidian_ Distribution 12 _d._
And tho’ we find no License of Non-Residence granted them by their
Founder, yet there is mention of Canons Resident and Non-Resident, for
whom great Defalcations are appointed to be made, to prevent such
Neglects, because the residentiary Canons bear not only the Burden of
that Duty belonging to the Chapel, but the Expence of Hospitality and
other Works of Charity, occasion’d from their residing at _Windsor_.

_Richard Beauchamp_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, obtain’d Power from
_Sextus_ IV. to make new Statutes, and dispens’d with the old Ones; and
in 1478. he gave to the Dean and every Canon Fourteen Days of
Non-Residence in every Term, to wit, Fifty Six Days in the Year. By the
Visitation, 1552. they obtain’d a Dispensation for Eighty Days; and the
Lord Chancellor _Hatton_ yet gave them a further Permission to Two
Hundred and Two Days, which the Lord Chancellor _Hyde_ confirm’d; so
that there remains One Hundred and Sixty Three Days in the Year, in
which the Canons ought to be resident with Hospitality, to be consonant
to their Statutes.

THE Canons are particularly oblig’d to pray for the Sovereign, and for
the happy Estate of the Order. If any Knight Companion, or other
Person, should bestow Ten Pounds _per Annum_, in order to be Partaker
of the Prayers appointed for the Benefactors of the College, his Name
was to be inscribed amongst them, and he also prayed for. Which
Article, tho’ King _Hen._ V. confirmed, yet with this Restriction, it
should not be admitted without the Consent of the Sovereign, or the
Knights-Companions of the Order. 4 _Edw._ VI. some one of them were
enjoyned to commemorate the Benefactors in a Discourse upon the
_Tuesday_ next after the third _Sunday_ in _Lent_, and on the first
_Tusedays_ in _June_, _September_ and _December_, and not only to set
forth the Munificence of the Founder, and of King _Hen._ VIII. but of
all others, so as to excite their Auditors to an Emulation, in the
Increase of Religion, and setting forth of God’s Glory.

THE civil Obligations of these Canons are to attend the Sovereign (or
his Deputy) and the Knights Companions at their grand Feast, and at the
Feasts of the Installation, or when the Sovereign or Knights Companions
shall come to the Chapel of St. _George_ upon a Religious Account. On
those solemn Days, over their Ecclessastical Habit they wear a Murrey
Mantle, (at this Day a Taffaty Robe, in Fashion like the three inferior
Officers of the Order) with the Arms of St. _George_ arched within a
Rundle on the Right Shoulder.


                             PETTY CANONS.

Those now call’d Petty Canons in the Patent of Foundation went
undistinguish’d with the _Canones Majores_: only in the Bull of Pope
_Clement_ VI. to the Archbishop of _Canterbury_ and Bishop of _Winton_,
for instituting the College, they are called _Presbyteri_; and by the
said Bishop in the very Words of his Statutes, _Presbyteri seu
Vicarii_, by which last Name they are styl’d at the first Erection of
the Garter. Their Number was originally Thirteen, only King _Henry_ the
VIIIth’s _English_ Statutes mention Eight petty Canons, besides
Thirteen Vicars, (but the _Latin_ takes Notice only of Thirteen
Priests, some called _Canonici Minores_, others _Vicarii_.) _Ann._ 1.
_Edw._ VI. Twelve Priests were appointed, and named Petty Canons, that
is, Four to be added to the Eight mention’d in the Statute of King
_Henry_ VIII. Yet in Queen _Elizabeth_’s Ordinances for the continual
Charge, the Petty Canons thereby provided for are Thirteen, agreeable
to the ancient Number of Vicars; but at this Day they are reduced to
Seven, and one of them Subchanter.

The Vicars at their Admission are bound to be Priests, at least
Deacons, and at the next Ordination they must commence Priests. Their
Statutes oblige them to continual Residence; and if absent from Matins
or from the grand Mass, they are amerced 2 _d._ and for every Canonical
Hour, the Mass of the Virgin _Mary_, or for the Defunct, a Penny: All
which Forfeitures were to be deducted out of their Sallary, and divided
among those Vicars that duly attend these Duties. But the Statutes 1
_Edw._ VI. state the Forfeit of Absence from Matins to be one
Half-penny, and the like from Procession, Communion or Even-Song, to be
paid to the Poor’s Box. And not only they, but all other Ministers of
the Chapel, if they leave the College above Twenty Days, without
Reasons sufficiently approved of by the Residentiary Canons; or any of
the Society that lead a vicious or scandalous Life, after the Fact
manifestly proved before the _Custos_, are to be expelled; but an
Absence less than Twenty Days, without Leave granted, is punishable at
Discretion.

Each Vicar enjoy’d at first an annual Pension of 8 _l._ paid after this
Manner, _viz._ every Kalendar Month 8 _s._ for their Diet, and at the
Expiration of every Quarter Day the Surplus was consign’d for other
Necessaries they stood in need of. King _Ed._ IV. encreased their
Pensions to Twenty Marks a-piece; to which Queen _Elizabeth_ (they
being then called Petty Canons) advanced 13 _s._ and 4 _d._ _per Annum_
to each out of the Lands confirm’d on the College by King _Ed._ VI. and
now their yearly Sallaries are encreas’d to Thirty Pounds. Out of these
Petty Canons is elected a Subchanter, (and commonly the same Person is
the Dean’s Vicar) who has the Cure of Souls, marries and buries, _&c._


                                CLERKS.

For the Service of the Choir at the Foundation were allotted Four
Clerks, one whereof was to be instituted a Deacon, and another a
Sub-deacon before their Admission, and these two were design’d (upon
Vacancy) to the Vicars Places. But for the other Two, Institution into
lesser Orders, in which they were to continue, were sufficient. Each of
the Two first sort had Eight Marks _per Ann._ and the other Two but
Six. King _Ed._ IV. encreas’d their Number to Thirteen, and allow’d
them 10 _l._ _per Ann._ They are mention’d to be Thirteen in _Hen._
VIII’s Statutes. 1 _Ed._ VI. they were encreas’d to Fifteen; but here
appointed to be Laymen, wearing Surplices in the Choir, each having the
same Allowance. 4 _Ed._ VI. a Model was proposed to augment the Number
of these Fifteen Clerks to Twenty. But in the Reign of Queen
_Elizabeth_ they were again reduced to Thirteen, as at this present
they remain, (one of them as Organist hath a double Clerk’s Place, and
consequently reckon’d for Two) and an Augmentation to each of 2 _l._ 13
_s._ 4 _d._ three Farthings yearly; which being at first opposed by the
Dean and Prebends, they at length (5 _Eliz._) consented to allow them
40 _s._ _per Ann._ a-piece, not out of the new Lands, but out of other
Payments which the Dean and Chapter should otherwise receive; and 1662.
they encreased their annual Pensions to 23 _l._ a-piece. They are
obliged to be present in the Choir at Divine Service as well as the
Petty Canons, and under the same Forfeitures; nor may they or the Petty
Canons go out of Town above Three at once, lest the Choir should be
left unprovided.


                              CHOIRISTERS.

For the Service of the Choir were appointed Six Choiristers, and they
to be of the Clerical Order at their Admission; to each of which was
allow’d Five Marks _per Ann._ And as the Deacon and Sub-deacon were
plac’d in the College only in Addition to the Vicars, and design’d to
succeed them in their Vacancies; so also were there Six secular
Children, endued with clear tuneable Voices, to succeed the
Choiristers, when they perceiv’d a Roughness or Alteration in their
Voices. King _Ed._ IV. encreas’d the Number of Choiristers to Thirteen,
and allow’d them annually Six Marks a-piece, and which was again
confirm’d by King _H._ VIII’s Statutes. Yet the Injunction of 1 _Ed._
VI. reduced them to Ten; but Queen _Elizabeth_ establish’d the former
Number, and gave in Augmentation among them all of 3 _l._ 11 _s._ 8
_d._ They are now reduced to Eight, and their present Exhibition is 12
_s._ _per_ Month.


§. 5. The Alms Knights we shall treat of in a threefold Estate: 1.
Under the Foundation; 2. When disjointed thence by Act of Parliament;
and, 3. As established anew by Queen _Elizabeth_.

1. THEN, King _Edward_ III. out of the great Regard he had to military
Honour, and those who had bravely behav’d themselves in his Wars, yet
after chanced to fall in decay, made a Provision for their Relief and
comfortable Subsistence in old Age, by providing for them in this his
Foundation, and making a Coalition in one joint Body with the Custos
and Canons; these he call’d _Milites Pauperes_, and we Poor or
Alms-Knights. The stated Number at first were Twenty Four, equal to the
Custos and Canons at the first Erection. But shortly after, upon his
instituting the Order of the _Garter_, Two more were added (as there
was to the first Canons) to make the compleat Number of the
Knights-Companions of that Order, which were Twenty Six, as we find
stated at the Ordination of the College by the Bishop of _Winchester_,
the Pope’s Delegate.

THE Intention of the Founder was for those that were real Objects of
Charity, as he describes them, _viz._ poor Knights, infirm in Body,
indigent and decay’d, or as the Statutes of the _Garter_ qualifies
them, such as thro’ adverse Turns of Fortune were reduced to that
Extremity that they had not wherewithal to sustain themselves, to live
so genteelly as was suitable for a Military Condition, which for
greater Caution was reiterated in the Statutes of King _Hen._ V. King
_Hen._ VIII. and in the Orders of Queen _Elizabeth_; for it was
express’d, in case any Estate of 20 _l._ _per Annum_ devolved on them,
such Knights were to be discharged the College, and they were to
proceed to a new Election.

AT the first each Knight-Companion of the Order presented his
Alms-Knight, but ever after their Election was to be at the Disposal of
the Sovereign. Their Habit was a Red Mantle, with the Escutcheon of St.
_George_, without any Garter to surround it. Their Exhibition, after
their first Election was 12 _d._ a-piece every Day they were at Service
in the Chapel, or resident in the College, besides 40 _s._ _per Annum_
for other Contingencies, it being the stated Allowance appointed to
each of the Canons Residents.

ABOUT the Beginning of King _Hen._ VI’s Reign, their _quotidian_
Distributions and Annual 40 _s._ had been unpaid upon the Account of
some Dissentions risen between them and the Dean and Canons; but upon
Complaint of _John_ Bishop of _York_, Lord Chancellor of _England_, and
Visitor of the College, 10 _Hen._ VI. they were redressed, and their
Arrears of both discharged, without any Deduction, and likewise
obtained this Clause, That if the Treasurer of the College became
negligent in future Payments, he should lose his own _Quotidians_, from
the Time of his voluntary Omission, and the same to be divided among
the Alms-Knights. Their Duty was to pray for the Sovereign and the
Knights Companions, to be every Day present at High Mass, the Masses of
the Virgin _Mary_, at Vespers and Compline, and in default to be
mulcted their 12 _d._ _toties quoties_, which was to be converted to
the Use of the other Alms-Knights, then residing in the Castle of
_Windsor_; notwithstanding which Decree, the Dean did afterwards break
in upon them, and disposed of these Forfeitures at his Pleasure, till 2
_Rich._ II. _Adam_, Bishop of St. _David_’s, then Chancellor of
_England_, and Visitor of the College, redress’d it, and another
Complaint of like Nature being made of the Deans disposing of Donations
and other Liberalities of the Knights Companions in wrong of the
Alms-Knights, this Chancellor decreed an equal Distribution between the
Alms-Knights and Canons, till the King and Council should otherwise
determine.

These and other Differences between the Dean and Canons and Alms
Knights, grew up to that height, that they became irreconcileable,
insomuch as in the Act of Parliament, 22 _Edw._ IV. for incorporating
of the Custos and Canons, by the Name of Dean and Canons, the
Alms-Knights were not only omitted; but this Clause inserted, _That the
Dean and Canons, and their Successors, should for ever more be utterly
quit and discharged from all manner of Exhibition or Charge of or for
any of the said Knights_. And this under the Cover, That the King has
greatly augmented the Number of the Ministers of the Chapel, that the
Revenue was insufficient to maintain both them and the Alms-Knights;
but in the Dean and Canons Answer to the Knights Petition to repeal
this Act, the Cause is alledged, For that some of these Knights used
their utmost Endeavours before this Act, to incorporate themselves, and
to be exempt from the Obedience and Rule of the Dean and Canons.

AFTER this Act, which struck off their Quotidian Portions and Fees
assigned by King _Edward_’s Foundation, how the Alms Knights subsisted
we find not; but so soon as King _Hen._ VII. came to the Crown, they
petitioned the King and Parliament for Repeal of the Act, 22 _Edw._ IV.
and alledged it was obtained without their Knowledge, or being called
thereunto, which Plea availed not at all; but on the contrary, the Dean
and Canons, some Years after, got an Exemplification thereof under the
great Seal, dated _Feb._ 4. 18 _Hen._ VII.

AND it is very evident from King _Hen._ VIII’s Letter to the College,
that what they did in this Nature after this Act commenced, was merely
upon Courtesie; for he returns them Thanks for a Pension of Twenty
Marks conferred upon _Peter Narbone_, whom he had recommended to an
Alms-Knights Place, and Promises to burthen them no more with Requests
of this sort, but that he would settle Lands for their Maintenance. So
great was their Caution, _Narbone_ was by Covenants indented between
him and the Dean and Canons, to relinquish his Pension upon that King’s
settling Lands on the College, for the Provision of such Knights. In
the Interval between the Disunion of the College and Alms-Knights, to
their Establishment by Queen _Elizabeth_, their Habit and Badge
continued the same, and was so confirmed by _Hen._ VIII’s Statutes. It
may be collected by his last Will, there was an Intention to draw the
_Garter_ about the Escutcheon of St. _George_, which Projection came to
nothing, and expired. In this Interval it is observ’d that several
Persons of considerable Rank and Distinction became Alms-Knights; some
of which were rendred great Objects of Charity; among which Number was
Sir _Robert Champlayne_, a valiant Knight, an Honour to our Nation, for
his renowned and martial Services abroad. He was of King _Henry_ VI’s
Party in the Civil Wars against King _Edw._ IV. Immediately after whose
coming to the Crown he left _England_, and travelled into _Hungary_,
(with an Equipage of Three Servants and Four Horses) where in the
Assistance of _Mathous Corvinius_ King of _Hungary_ against the
_Turks_, he behaved himself very gallantly; but prosperous Fortune not
always attending him with Success, he receiv’d many Wounds; and at
length was taken Prisoner, lost all, and forced to pay 1500 Ducats for
his Ransom; for the Attestation of which he had the Great Seals of the
King of _Hungary_, the Archbishop of _Crete_, Legate _de Latere_ in
_Hungary_, the Emperor of _Germany_, the King of _Sicily_, the Count
_Palatine_ of the _Rhine_, and the Duke of _Burgundy_; and lastly, a
Declaration thereof under the Privy Seal of King _Edw._ IV. And being
reduced to so low an Ebb of Fortune, he was, thro’ _Hen._ VII’s Favour,
admitted an Alms-Knight.

But some obtained Admittance, probably out of Devotion, rather than
Poverty, as _Thomas Hulme_, _Clarenceux_ King of Arms, _Temp. Edw._ IV.
_Lodowick Carly_, the King’s Physician, and _John Mewtes_, Secretary of
the _French_ Tongue, both _Temp. Hen._ VII. and _Bartholomew Westby_
made second Baron of the _Exchequer_, 1 _Hen._ VIII.

IT is evident King _Hen._ VIII. designed a Re-establishment of half the
ancient Number of Alms-Knights, _viz._ Thirteen; for which purpose he
appointed by his Will 600 _l._ _per Annum_, in Mannors, Lands, and
Spiritual Promotions, settled upon the Dean and Canons, and their
Successors for ever, upon the Proviso’s that they should find Two
Priests to say Mass at his Tomb, to commemorate yearly Four Obits for
him, and at every Obit distribute 12 _l._ in Alms, likewise to pay 12
_d._ a Week to those Thirteen Alms-Knights, who were to have once a
Year a long Gown of White Cloth, and a Mantle of Red, besides Five
Marks annually, to such one among them as should be constituted their
Governor, and so much for a Sermon every _Sunday_ throughout the Year.
In Performance of which Will, King _Edw._ VI. in the first Year of his
Reign, did confer several Lands upon the College; but 600 _l._ _per
Annum_ of these Rents were by the Dean and Canons paid back, to be
employed on erecting of Houses for the Alms-Knights, intended to be
settled by King _Hen._ VIII. This Work began not till the 3d and 4th of
_Philip_ and _Mary_, and was finished the 5th and 6th of their Reign,
the Charge amounting to 2747 _l._ 7 _s._ 6 _d._ These Houses are
situate on the South side of the Lower Ward of the Castle, and contain
Thirteen Rooms, besides an Hall, a Kitchin, and a Pastry; the Stone was
brought from _Reading_, the Timber from the Forest, and the Lead, and
Apparels for the Chimnies, from _Suffolk Place_ in _Southwark_. At a
Chapter of the _Garter_, held the 1st of _June_, the 4th and 5th of
_Philip_ and _Mary_, the Houses being then near finished, a Debate
arose about placing some Alms-Knights therein, if possible, by
_Michaelmas_ following, whereupon the Marquiss of _Winton_,
Lord-Treasurer, had Orders to assign Lands for their Maintenance; and
towards the compleating of this the Queen had nominated Nine of the
Thirteen designed; but falling sick in _August_, a stop was put to the
Affair, till Queen _Elizabeth_ coming to the Crown confirmed her
Sister’s Grants to the Nine nominated Knights, and made up the Number
full Thirteen, ordained by King _Henry_ VIII. under which Establishment
they still remain; for afterwards, _viz._ _Aug._ 30. in the first Year
of her Reign, minding the Continuance of King _Edward_’s Foundation,
the Intent of her Progenitors, and Advancement of the Order of the
_Garter_, and King _Henry_ VIII’s Will, for the Support of Thirteen
poor Men decayed in Wars, to be called Thirteen Knights of _Windsor_;
and having erected certain Orders for their better Regulation, and
declar’d how and in what manner the 600 _l._ given by her Father should
be employ’d for the Maintenance of these Knights and their Successors,
she lastly declared, That the Dean and Canons should for ever cause
these Rules and Orders to be observed.

_Impr._ That there be Thirteen Poor Knights, all Gentlemen, one whereof
to be Governour, that have spent their Time in the Wars, or other
Service of the Realm, having little or nothing to live upon, to be
elected by the Sovereign and Successors.

2. _It._ The Governour and Knights must be unmarried, yet that the
Crown may dispence withal; and upon their marrying are to lose their
Place.

3. _It._ None deformed, and convicted of Heresie, Felony, or any
notable Crime, is to be admitted of the Thirteen, and after admittance,
so convicted, to be expelled.

4. _It._ Each Knight to have yearly, for their Liveries, a Red Gown of
Four Yards, and a Mantle of Blue or Purple of Five Yards, at 6 _s._ and
8 _d._ _per_ Yard.

5. _It._ An Escutcheon of St. _George_ embroidered without the
_Garter_, to be upon the Left Shoulder of the Mantle.

6. _It._ The Charges of the Cloth, Lining, Making, and Embroidering, to
be paid by the Dean and Chapter, out of the Revenue of the Foundation.

7. _It._ That the Knights attend, Morning and Afternoon, Divine
Service, within the College, in their ordinary Apparel, without a
reasonable Let to be allowed by the Governour.

8. _It._ That they keep their Lodgings appointed, and Table in a common
Hall appointed, and to have their Provisions by a common Purse, except
for a reasonable Cause any be licensed to the contrary by the Dean, and
that License not to endure above Twenty Days in a Year, excepting only
for Sickness.

9. _It._ They are not to haunt the Town, nor Publick Houses, nor call
any Woman into their Lodgings, without reasonable Cause and License of
the Dean.

10. _It._ Twelve of them to be obedient to him appointed to be
Governour, and all Thirteen to the Dean and Chapter, in the Observation
of these Statutes.

11. _It._ The Thirteen Knights to have Places within the Church, where
the Dean and Canons shall think best to hear the Divine Service
together.

12. _It._ To be present at the quarterly Service, for the Memory of the
Patrons and Founder of the College, and especially of King _Hen._ VIII.
and Queen _Elizabeth_, and have each of them, at that Time, 20 _d._ and
the Governour 2 _s._ The said Service to be the _Sundays_ next before
the Quarter-days, the _Annunciation_, St. _John Baptist_, _Michaelmas_,
and _Christmas_.

13. _It._ Any of the Twelve Knights disobeying the Governour, in any of
these Statutes, to incur the Forfeiture the Dean and Chapter shall put
on him, the Governour to report the Offence, which if more heinous, the
Dean and Chapter are to give a Warning, and register the same, and
after a second Warning Expulsion is to follow; the like Punishment to
the Governour, disobeying the Dean and Chapter in the Observation of
these Statutes.

14. _It._ The Penalties of the Punished to be imployed by the Dean and
Chapter at their Discretion, upon any of the Ministers or Choristers of
the Church.

15. _It._ Upon the King or Queen’s coming to or going from _Windsor_,
the Thirteen Knights are to stand before their Doors in their Apparel,
and do Obedience.

16. _It._ At the keeping of the Feast of St. _George_, they are to
stand likewise in their Apparel before their Doors, at the coming and
going out of the Lieutenant, and of other the Knights-Companions.

17. _It._ At every Feast of St. _George_ they shall sit together in
their Apparel at one Table, and have Allowance of Meat and Drink at the
Royal Charges.

18. _It._ They are daily in their Prayers to pray for the Sovereign and
the Knights-Companions.

19. _It._ They are always to lie in their Lodging, and upon lying out
of them and the College, without License from the Dean, to forfeit 12
_d._

20. _It._ If Lands or Revenues of 20 _l._ _per Annum_ fall to any of
the poor Knights, he is to be removed, and another put into his Place.

21. _It._ They are every Day (excepting Cause of Sickness) to be
present at Divine Service in the College, as aforesaid, and receive a
daily Distribution of 12 _d._ _per_ Day, to be paid them monthly, if it
may be, or at least in such sort as the other Ministers of the Chapel
be paid; and he that shall absent himself one Day, without leave from
the Dean, shall lose his Distribution of 12 _d._

22. _It._ The Governour is to keep a Book, and register, the Absenters,
and other Defaulters of the Statutes, whereof he shall deliver one to
the Dean, and another to the Steward, or him that payeth the poor
Knights, who by Order of the Dean is to make proper Defalcations at the
Time of paying them.

23. _It._ The Dean once a Year is to appoint a Day and Hour, at which
the poor Knights are to be warned to be present, to hear these Statutes
read, and any Knight absenting after that Warning, and without License,
is to forfeit 6 _s._ 8 _d._

24. _It._ Any elected poor Knight, before he take any Commodity of his
Room, shall take a corporal Oath before the Dean, to be faithful and
true to the Crown, and that for the time of their tarrying there to
truly observe the Statutes and Ordinances upon the Penalties contain’d
in the said Statutes.

THE 25th Article is a Dispensation for those poor Knights chosen before
these Statutes, who were not certainly known Gentlemen, yet Men well
reported for Honesty, and meet to be relieved; but with an Intent that
none hereafter be admitted, unless a Gentleman born, agreeable to the
first Order.

The annual Allowance of each, upon this new Establishment, is 18 _l._ 5
_s._ to be paid by the Dean of _Windsor_, (but their Governour has 3
_l._ 6 _s._ and 8 _d._ more) besides their Gown and Mantle mentioned in
their Statutes. King _James_ I. doubled this Pension, and made it
payable out of the Exchequer quarterly.

To these Thirteen Alms-Knights, _temp. Car._ I. Five more were added,
Two of the Foundation of Sir _Peter la Maire_, Knight, and Three of Sir
_Francis Crane_, Knight, Chancellor of the Garter; for Sir _Peter_, by
his last Will, dated _Jan._ 8. 1631. bequeath’d 1500 _l._ to charitable
Uses, to be dispos’d as Sir _Francis_ (who had marry’d his Sister)
should think fit, within Four Years after his Death; whereupon Sir
_Francis_, determining to erect certain Houses in _Windsor_-Castle, for
the dwelling of Five Alms-Knights, design’d the said 1500 _l._ towards
that Use, and what was deficient made up at his own Cost, charging his
Brother Executor, Sir _Richard Crane_, by his Will, dated _Aug._ 27.
1635. to see the Pile which he had began, finish’d. Sir _Francis_ also
bequeath’d 200 _l._ _per Annum_ to be settled in Lands, by his
Executors, for the perpetual Maintenance of Five Alms-Knights, after
the rate of 40 _l._ _per Annum_ to every one of them; but his Executor
growing slack in the Performance, the Work being rather expos’d to
Ruin, than forwarded by him; upon Complaints made to the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions in Chapter, Orders were issu’d out to quicken him,
and a peremptory Letter, dated _Mar._ 7. 1639. to go on with the Work
faithfully; which Commands he evading, and bad Times coming on, the
Building was totally neglected. Sir _Richard Crane_ afterward dying, by
his Will, dated _Sept._ 20. 1645. he appointed that his Mannor of
_Carbrooke_ in _Norfolk_, should stand bound for ever for Payment of
the said 200 _l._ _per Annum_; whereupon, by Inquisition taken at
_Windsor_, _Mar._ 4. 1652. (by Virtue of a Commission upon the Statute
_Anno_ 43 _Eliz._ for charitable Uses) the Mannors of _Woodrising_ and
_Wesfield_, &c. in _Norfolk_, were found liable to satisfie for
building and finishing the said Five Houses, and payment of the 200
_l._ yearly; and further, that the Arrears thereof, from Sir _Francis
Crane_’s Death, came at that time to 3200 _l._ some Contest ensu’d in
_Chancery_; nevertheless the 200 _l._ _per Annum_ was, _July_ 19. 1655.
decreed to be paid out of all the Lands which were Sir _Richard_’s, and
the building of the Houses out of his personal Estate. At Two Years
Expiration arose that fair Pile of Building, between the Chancellor’s
and Garter’s Towers, against the West Wall, in the lower Ward of the
Castle, which was begun again and finish’d the next Year; the Expences
amounting to 1700 _l._ But for a final End of this Suit, it was
decreed, _Jan._ 27. 1659. the Mannor of _Carbrooke_ should stand
charg’d with 200 _l._ _per Annum_, payable half-yearly at _Michaelmas_
and _Lady-day_, or within Thirty Days after, for the Maintenance of
Five Alms-Knights, together with 30 _l._ yearly for Repairs, payable
also then; which annual Sum of 230 _l._ _Anno_ 12 _Car._ II. in a
Chapter held at _Whitehall_, _Jan._ 14. the King decreed the Chancellor
of the Order, for the Time being, should receive and dispose thereof
thus: 200 _l._ _per Annum_ among the Five new Alms-Knights quarterly,
at the Four usual Feasts of the Year, and to employ the residue upon
Repair of the new Buildings erected for their Lodgings; which Powers
were inserted in the Patent for his Office, bearing date the 20th of
the same Month. And it was moreover decreed, that these Five Knights
should be subject to the same Rules and Government of the Thirteen of
Queen _Elizabeth_’s Foundation, and made equal Partakers of the same
Privileges, and wear the like Habits.

KING _Charles_ I. taking into Consideration the Donation of Sir
_Francis Crane_, which made the Alms-Knights Eighteen, (tho’ they were
not yet settled) intended to make up Twenty Six, as they were at the
Institution of the Order; to compleat which Design, a Chapter was held
at _Whitehall_, _Apr._ 18. 1637. for the Knights-Companions to consider
the best Way how the same might be effected, and report their Opinions;
but nothing was done thereupon, and this Affair waits a more propitious
Opportunity.


§ 6. THE other Ministers of the College and Chapel of St. _George_,
call’d _Ministers_ in the Foundation Patent, are the superior Officers,
_viz._ The Chantor, Steward and Treasurer.

THE Chantor is elected from among the Canons, whose Office is chiefly
to govern those that sing in the Choir, and such as are employ’d about
Divine Service. Before the Reformation he appointed who should begin
the Antiphones, celebrate Masses, and read the Lessons, Epistles and
Gospels. To his Care was committed all the Books, Crosses, Chalices,
Vestments, and all the Sacred Ornaments of the Chapel. He receives the
Offerings there made, and Accounts for them; for all which Services an
annual Pension of 5 _l._ is allow’d him.

THE Steward and Treasurer are annually chosen on the Morrow after
_Michaelmas-day_ from out of the Canons Resident. To the Steward’s
Office appertains the Government of all the Revenues of the College,
the Rents and Profits whereof he is to pay the Treasurer. In his
Custody are repos’d all the Ornaments, Jewels, and other Treasure of
the Chapel, not committed to the Chantor, under the Obligation of
rendring an Account; and his yearly Pension is 5 _l._

THE Treasurer is to distribute to the Custos, Canons, Vicars, _&c._
their Pensions and Allowances, which if he fail Eight Days after their
prefix’d Times of Payment, he is debar’d of his own _quotidians_, as
Canon Resident, until such Arrears be discharg’d; as likewise the
Steward, if he be found delinquent. His Pension is also 5 _l._ _per
Annum_. There is one Treasurer to receive the Rents of the old Lands,
and another chosen from the Canons to receive the new, who have been
allow’d the like annual Pensions. The former is term’d _Seneschallus
veteris_, the latter _Seneschallus novæ Dotationis_.

MOREOVER, there is a Steward of the Courts, and Clerk of the Lands,
which is an Officer under both the before-mention’d Stewards. He keeps
the Courts by himself or Deputy, and is a Barrester at Law, and the
standing Council for the College. His yearly Pension is 20 Nobles. But
the Council _in Spiritualibus_ is usually a Graduate in the Law.

THE Chapter-Clerk enters and registers all Acts of the Chapter-House;
he draws and engrosses all Indentures, Patents, Grants, Leases, _&c._
which pass the common Seal of the Dean and Canons. His Pension is 3
_l._ 6 _s._ 8 _d._ _per Annum_. The Under Stewardship and Chapter
Clerkship heretofore were enjoy’d by one Person, but of late they are
divided, and now he must be a Barrester at Law.

OF the Virgers Institution the Statutes of the College make mention,
that in Procession and other Solemnities, they were to go before the
Dean and Canons, bearing their Rods, for which Service they were to
have annually a Robe, and 6 _d._ _per Diem_. And besides these, there
are Two Sextons, Two Bell-ringers, a Clock-keeper, and a Porter who
attends the shutting and opening of the Gates.


§ 7. FOR the Endowment of the College we shall only treat upon those
Lands given to the Maintenance of this Foundation by the Founder
himself, or by his Successors, or by Sovereigns of _The Order of the
Garter_, such as have been Knights-Companions.

KING _Edw._ III. by his Letters Patent of the Foundation [22 _Edw._
III.] aforesaid, gave them [the Custos, Canons, Alms-Knights and
Ministers] the Advowsons of the Churches of _Wyardesbury_ [_Rasbury_]
in _Lincoln_, _South-Tanton_ in _Exeter_, and _Uttoxater_ in _Coventry_
and _Litchfield_ Diocess, in Frank Almoigne, free from all Secular
Exactions; which License, to appropriate the same to the College,
notwithstanding the Statute of _Mortmain_, he appointed as much out of
his Treasure for their Support, as amounted to an immoveable Estate of
1000 _l._ _per Annum_; and lest there might be any Defect in the
Knights Title to _Uttoxater_ and _South-Tanton_, _Henry_ Earl of
_Lancaster_, 23 _Edw._ III. and _Thomas Beauchamp_ Earl of _Warwick_,
that Year had special Licenses granted them in Right of Patronage to
the said Two Advowsons, and they to receive the same. Another such
License, 28th of _January_, 24 _Edw._ III. was given to _William de
Bohun_ Earl of _Northampton_, for assigning to the Custos and Chaplains
the Advowson of _Dodyngton_ in _Com. Oxon_, which he held of the King
_in Capite_. The 28th of _January_ following, this Royal Founder
conferr’d on them (by the Name of Custos and Chaplains of his free
Chapel at _Windsor_) one Messuage, Seventeen Acres of Land, one of
Pasture, and 3 _s._ Rent, in _Wyrardesbury_ in _Com. Bucks_, which had
been convey’d to him by _Richard de Gloucester_, Heir to _Isabel de
Ditton_; and the 22d of _May_ ensuing granted unto them the Advowson of
_Dachet_ near _Windsor_.

_Anno_ 25 _Edw._ III. the King gave them the Advowsons of the Churches
of _Eure_ in _Com. Bucks_, of _Riston_ in _Com. Norfolk_, and of
_Whaddon_ and _Caxton_ in _Com. Cantab._, and in _May_ that Year the
Advowson of _Simondesbourne_ (surrender’d _temp. Edw._ IV. to _Richard_
Duke of _Gloucester_) and of St. _Stephens_ of _Saltash_. The first of
these Queen _Philippa_ purchas’d of Sir _John Darcy_, and the other of
_Edward_ the Black Prince; and gave them both, first to the King, that
by his Grant afterwards to the College its Title might be more
corroborated. The same Year, _October_ 26. the King bestow’d on them
100 Marks _per Annum_, out of the Farm of the Town of _Northampton_, to
be paid by the Bailiff of the Town at _Easter_ and _Michaelmas_ by
equal Allotments: And it was at the Founder’s Instance (therefore
worthy to be inserted) that the Town of _Yarmouth_, 26 _Edw._ III.
under their Common Seal, granted them a Last of Red Herrings yearly,
well dry’d and cleans’d, to take the Corporation into their Prayers;
tho’ some say it was a Penance enjoyn’d them for murdering a Magistrate.

IN the 26 _Edw._ III. the Founder granted them and their Successors the
Mannor of _Eure_ near _Weybrigg_, in _Com. Bucks_, the Mannor of
_Craswell_ in _Bray_ in _Com. Berks_, and a Wear call’d _Braybrook_,
situated in the _Thames_, with all the Lands in that Parish convey’d
unto him by Sir _John Philibert_, together with the Knights Fees,
Advowsons, _&c._ belonging to those Mannors. He gave to the Custos and
College soon after the Seisin thereof, as also of a Wood call’d
_Temple-Wood_ in _Stoke-Pogeys_, convey’d to the King by _John de
Molyns_: But deeming all the Lands too small for the End he intended,
28 _Edw._ III. the King granted the Custos and College, by Letters
Patent, a Pension of 100 _l._ _per Annum_ out of the Exchequer; and
upon the vacating the same, 34 _Edw._ III. he gave them yearly Lands of
101 _l._ 11 _s._ 11 _d._ out of the Possessions of religious Aliens,
which fell into his Hands by Occasion of the _French_ Wars: But lest
these Possessions should be again restor’d upon a Treaty of Peace, they
were to receive the annual Sum of 101 _l._ 11 _s._ 11 _d._ out of the
Exchequer, till they were provided of Lands of the like Value. Upon
several Restrictions, he granted them 51 _l._ 9 _s._ 9 _d._ yearly to
be receiv’d out of 126 _l._ which the Prior of _Takkele_ paid him for
the Farm of that Priory, it being then in the King’s Hand by reason of
the War with _France_. And by reason the Revenues did not amount to
1000 _l_. _per Annum_, as he design’d at the Foundation, in the 35th
Year of his Reign, he granted them so much Money yearly out of the
Exchequer, as would make up the Deficiency, till Lands or Rents of that
Value should be settled on them. Lastly, 39 _Edw._ III. the Founder
bestow’d on them a Piece of Ground in _New Windsor_, (whereon had stood
an House of _John_ of _London_) in lieu of the great Garden South of
the Castle, formerly given them by him; and also a Garden opposite
thereunto on the other side of the Way. Besides these Largesses of the
Founders, there were others made by pious and devout Persons, said to
be incorporated into the first Foundation, and made up that Revenue
which _William_ Bishop of _Winchester_ adjudg’d sufficient for the
Support of the College, which we shall silently pass over with the bare
mention only.

THE Mannor of _Dodyngton_-Castle; two Pastures call’d _Frith_ and
_Ashcroft_; the Chapel of _Langeley_; the Parsonages of _Estriton_,
_Langeley-Maries_, _Wantynge_, _Shaldeborne_, _Wedonbeek_, _Glynde_ and
_Ryslepe_; the Pensions of the Vicarages of _Wantynge_, _Clyffe_,
_Tylthey_ and _Gottesford_; and the Portions of _Bassyngborne_ and
_Prestwyke_, in _Haseley_ magna, _Chalgrave_, _Adewelle_, _Aston_,
_Rowhand_, _Sevyndon_, _Kyngeston_ and _Henton_, in _Stoke-Basset_, and
_Clopecote_ in _Gatehampton_; _Whytechyrche_, _Maplederham_,
_Retherfeld_, _Esthenreth Stretham_; of _Thornecroft_ in _Letherhed_;
of _Totynbeek_ in _Wodesdon_; _Evington_, _Woodmershthorne_; of
_Fordham_, _Ethrope_, _Newenham_, and in _Tollesworth_.

IN succeeding Times other considerable Donations were made by the
Sovereigns and Knights Companions (omitting others.) Some of which, as
they fall in our way, we shall speak of.

13 _Rich._ II. that King gave them a Croft in _Northmolton_, with the
Advowson of that Church.

9 _Hen._ V. _John_, Duke of _Bedford_, third Son to King _Hen._ IV.
conferr’d on them the Priory of _Okeborne_ in _Wilts_ (a Cell to _Bec_
in _Normandy_) with all its Appurtenances: Which Donation was confirm’d
by King _Hen._ V. and afterwards by King _Edw._ IV.

7 _Edw._ IV. that King, who had a singular Respect for the College,
conferr’d on them the Mannor of _Atherston_ in _Com. Warwick_, the
Mannors and Advowsons of _Chesingbury_ in _Wilts_, and of _Quarle_ in
_Hantshire_; the Church and Priorate of _Uphaven_, and the Deanry or
Chapel of St. _Burien_ in _Cornwall_, with an Addition of an annual
Pension, which the Abbot of _Sautrie_ discharg’d for the Church of
_Fulburne_, to the Abbey _de bona Requie_, and another yearly Income of
20 _l._ paid by the Abbot of _Rousford_ for the Mediety of the Church
of _Rotheram_.

13 _Edw._ IV. he consign’d to them the Mannor or Priorate of
_Munclane_, in _Com. Hereford_.

14 _Edw._ IV. he gave unto them the Custody, Patronage, and free
Disposition of the Hospital or Free Chapel of St. _Anthony_, _London_,
(a Preceptory to St. _Anthony_ of _Vienna_, with all the Liberties,
Privileges, Lands, _&c._) upon the first Vacancy. The same Year he
endow’d them with the Priorate of _Brimsfield_ in _Com. Gloucest._ the
Mannor of _Blakenham_ in _Suffolk_; the Priorate of St. _Elene_ in the
_Isle of Wight_; the Priorate or Mannor of _Charleton_ in _Wilts_; and
all the Lands, _&c._ in _Northmundon_, _Compton_ and _Weleigh_, in
_Sussex_ and _Southampton_; the Mannor of _Ponyngton_ and _Widon_ in
_Dorset_, together with an annual Pension of 12 Marks, payable by the
Priory of _Monte acuto_, with all the Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Advowsons, _&c._ annex’d to the said Priorates and Mannors. The same
Year he bestow’d on them the Mannor of _Membury_ in _Com. Dorset_; the
Lordships of _Preston_ and _Monkesilver_ in _Com. Somerset_; the
Advowsons of _Puryton_ and _Wollavington_ in that County, together with
the Knights Fees, Advowsons, Profits, Rights, _&c._

18 _Edw._ IV. his Feoffees, the Queen, the Arch-Bishop of _York_, and
others seised to the Use of the King, demis’d to them the Mannor of
_Wykecombe_, call’d _Bassetsbury_, the Fee-Farm of the Town of _Great
Wykecombe_, the Mannor of _Crendon_ in _Com. Bucks_, and the Mannors of
_Haseley_ and _Pyrton_ in _Com. Oxon_: And that Year the King gave unto
them the Advowson of the Church of _Cheshunt_, being of his own
Patronage, provided the Vicarige was sufficiently endow’d, and a
compleat Sum of Money annually distributed among the poor Parishioners,
according to the Diocesan’s Ordinance. To these he united the Custody
or Deanry of the Free Chapel of _Wolverhampton_ in _Com. Staff_. to the
Custos or Dean of this College, and his Successors for ever; which
Church, _cum membris_, is exempt from not only the Jurisdiction, _&c._
of the Bishop of _Litchfield_ and _Coventry_, but by a Papal Bull from
all Legates and Delegates; nor is it subject to any terrene Power, but
the King of _England_ alone, and under it to the perpetual Visitation
of the Keepers of the Great Seal, _pro tempore_.

20 _Edw._ IV. he resign’d to them the Advowson or Patronage of the
Prebend of _Ewern_ in _Com. Dorset_, with all its Rights and
Privileges: And lastly, in the 21st Year of his Reign, he granted them
Two Parts of the Mannors of _Old Swynford_ and _Gannow_, in _Com.
Wygorn_. and the Reversion of the Third Part of them, with the Advowson
of the Church of _Old Swynford_; nor was he thus munificent alone, but
excited and spurr’d on others to the like Example, licensing, in the
first Year of his Reign, all his Subjects to confer what they pleas’d
to the Dean and Canons, within the Value of 300 Marks _per Annum_, as
well such as held of him _in Capite_ or otherwise, notwithstanding the
Statute of _Mortmain_; and afterwards increas’d this License to Lands
of 500 _l._ _per Annum_ Value, (which King _Hen._ VIII. extended to
1000 _l._) Hereupon, _Anno_ 20 _Edw._ IV. _John_, Duke of _Suffolk_,
and _Elizabeth_ his Wife, the King’s Sister, were permitted to assign
to them the Mannor or Lordship of _Grovebury_, otherwise call’d
_Leighton Busard_, in _Com. Bedford_, the Church of _Tintagell_ in
_Cornwall_, as also Nineteen Messuages, Seven Tofts, One Hundred and
Forty Acres of Land, Fourteen of Meadow, One Hundred and Forty of
Pasture, One Hundred of Wood, and Four Shillings Rent in _Newford_ and
_Blanford_, in _Com. Dorset_, and Seventy Messuages, Twelve Tofts, Five
Hundred Acres of Land, One Hundred of Meadow, Two Hundred of Pasture,
Forty of Wood, and Twenty Shillings Rent, in _Stokeley_, _Northall_,
_Edelesburgh_ and _Rodenach_, in _Com. Bucks_, and Twenty Messuages,
Eight Tofts, Three Hundred Acres of Land, Sixty of Meadow, Two Hundred
of Pasture, Forty of Wood, and Twenty Shillings Rent, in _Compton St.
John_, in _Com. Sussex_, and Ten Messuages, Nine Tofts, Two Hundred
Acres of Land, Twenty of Meadow, One Hundred of Pasture, Ten of Wood,
and Twenty Shillings Rent, in _Portsmouth_ and _Burghegge_, in
_Hampshire_, and One Messuage, Three Tofts, Sixty Acres of Land, Six of
Meadow, Forty of Pasture, and Twenty Shillings Rent, in _Stodeham_, in
_Com. Hertford_, held of the King _in Capite_, without any Restriction
whatsoever, for which the Duke and Dutchess were to be had in the
perpetual Orisons of the Dean and Canons. The same Year Sir _Walter
Devoreux de Feners_, Knight, together with Sir _John Devoreux_ and
others his Feofees, made over to them the Mannor, Church, and perpetual
Advowsons of _Sutton Courtney_ in _Com. Berks_.

All the before-mentioned Endowments are called the Lands of the old
Dotation, to distinguish them from those confirmed on the College by
King _Edw._ VI. which are term’d the Lands of the new Dotation; of
which hereafter. But several of them given by King _Edw._ IV. the
College never possessed, _viz._ _Atherston_, _Quarle_, _Uphaven_, _St.
Burien_, _Fulburne_ Pension, _Brimfield_, _St. Elen_, _Charleton_,
_Blakenham_, _Ponyngton_, _Wedon_, _Old Swynford_, and _Gannow_, and of
some others they were seized but a short time, _viz._ _Chesingbury_,
the Lands in _Newford_, _Blandford_, and _Portsmouth_. Besides these,
the College was dispossess’d of _Gottesford_, _temp. Hen._ VI. of
_Cheshunt_, _temp. Hen._ VII. _temp. Hen._ VIII. or a little before of
_Wodemershthorn_, _Tylthey_, _Retherfeld_, _Levyngdon_, _Stoke-Basset_,
_Stretham_, _Totingbeek_, _Fordham_, _Elthorp_, _Newenham_, and
_Tollesworth_; afterwards they surrendred into the Hands of King _Hen._
VIII. _Eure_, _Clyff_, _Ashton_, _Rowhand_, _Kingston_, _Esthenreth_,
_Northmundon_, _Compton_, _Weleg_, _Compton St. John_, and _Shobingdon_
Portion; and upon the _Reformation_ the College lost at least 1000
Marks _per Annum_, in the Profit made by St. _Anthony_’s Piggs, which
the Appropriation of the Hospital of St. _Anthony_’s _London_ brought
to it, and no less then 500 _per Annum_, the Offerings of Sir _John
Shorne_’s Shrine at _Northmarston_ in _Com. Bucks_, a Man of great
Piety and Veneration with the People, and sometime Rector there. The
Advowson of this Church was appropriated to the Dean and Canons, by the
Convent of _Dunstaple_, _temp. Edw._ IV. in exchange for _Wedenbeck_ in
_Com. Bedford_.

THE Dean and Canons having convey’d unto K. _H._ VIII. the Mannor and
Rectory of _Ivor_ in _Bucks_, the Mannor of _Dammery-Court_ in
_Dorset_, and other Lands, Rents, Portions, and Pensions in the
Counties of _Somerset_, _Hants_, _Middlesex_, _Oxford_, and _Sussex_,
to the yearly Value of 160 _l._ 2 _s._ 4 _d._ for which they had no
Recompence in his Life, that King, by his last Will, ordered them an
Equivalent upon the Commutation and Agreement of an Exchange; which
Will, King _Edw._ VI. his Son and Successor performed, as well for the
Assurance of Lands, to the yearly Value of 600 _l._ to the Dean and
Canons for ever, to the Uses in the Will, as for the Assurance of other
Lands, of the annual Value of the said 160 _l._ 2 _s._ and 4 _d._
wherefore by Letters Patent, dated the 7th of _October_, in the First
Year of his Reign, he granted them the Rectories of _Bradnynche_,
_Northam_, _Iplepen_, _Ilsington_, and _Southmolton_ in _Com. Devon_,
the Tithe of Corn of _Otery_, in that County, as also _Blossoms-Inn_ in
St. _Laurence-lane_, _London_, the Tithes of Grain, _&c._ of the
Rectory of _Ambrosbury_, in _Wilts_, and all the Tithes of _Bedwyn_,
_Stoke_, _Wilton_, _Harden_, _Harden-Tunrige_, _Knoll_, _Pathall_,
_Chisbury_, _East-Grafton_, _West-Grafton_, _Grafton-Martin_, and
_Wexcomb_, the Prebend of _Alcannyngs_ and _Urchefounte_, the Rectories
of _Urchefounte_, _Stapleford_, _Tytcombe_, and _Froxfeild_, all in
_Com. Wilts_, and all the annual Pension of 8 _l._ issuing out of the
Manner of _Icombe_ in _Com. Gloucester_, the Rectory and Vicarige of
_Ikelington_ in _Cambridgeshire_, the Rectory of _East-Beckworth_ in
_Surrey_, the Reversion of the Portion of Tithes of _Trequite_ in
_Cornwall_, and the Rent of 13 _s._ 4 _d._ reserved upon the same, the
Rectory and Church of _Plympton_, and the Chapels of _Plymstoke_,
_Wembury_, _Shagh_, _Sandford-Spone_, _Plympton_, _St. Maurice_ and
_Brixton_, in _Com. Devon_, the Rectory of _Isleworth_ and
_Farickenham_ in _Com. Middlesex_, and _Shiplake_ in _Com. Oxon_, the
Reversion of the Rectory of _Aberguille_, and of the Chapels of
_Llanlawet_ [_Llanbadock_] and _Llanpenysaunt_, with the Rent of 30
reserved thereon, the Reversions of the Rectory of _Talgarth_, with the
reserved Rent of 11 _l._ 6 _s._ 8 _d._ the Reversion of the Rectory of
_Mara_ in _Com. Brecknock_, and 6 _l._ Rent, and that of St. _Germains_
in _Cornwall_, with 61 _l._ 13 _s._ and 4 _d._ Rent, to have and to
hold, _&c._ forever, except the Tithes of _Woolpat_ and _Fitzwaren_ in
_Wilts_, the Vicarige-House of _Ikelington_, Marriage-Money,
Dirge-Money, and Mass-Money, and the whole Profit of the Bedrolls of
_Ikelington_; nevertheless to pay the Crown in the Court of
_Augmentation_, for the Rectories of _Aberguille_, _Talgarth_ and
_Mara_, the Chapels _Llanbadock_ and _Llanpenysaunt_ 4 _l._ 2 _s._ 8
_d._ in the Name of Tenths, and for all Rents, Services, _&c._ of the
other Rectories, _&c._ 48 _l._ 7 _s._ 4 _d._ annually at _Michaelmas_.
Moreover, within all these Premises, the King granted them Court Leets,
or Views of Frankpledge, and to levy Fines, Amerciaments, Free Warrens,
Waifs, and Felons Goods, and all other Profits, _&c._ whatsoever, and
the said Rectories, Tithes, Pensions, Rents, and all other Gifts and
Grants in the Possession of the Dean and Chapter, were confirmed to
them by Act of Parliament, 2 _Jac._ I.

THE ancient Rate of these New Lands in the King’s Books was 661 _l._ 6
_s._ and 8 _d._ _per Annum_; but according to the improved Rents, as
they were then turned over to the College, 812 _l._ 12 _s_. 9 _d._ out
of which 160 _l._ 2 _s._ 4 _d._ was yearly allowed them in Requital of
their Lands passed to King _Hen._ VIII. and 600 _l._ _per Annum_, for
accomplishment of his Will; but the remaining Sum, _viz._ 52 _l._ 10
_s._ 5 _d._ was reserved in lieu of Tenths, to be paid into the Court
of _Augmentation_; nevertheless, this last reserved Sum was not
assented unto by the Dean and Canons to be so paid, because the Charges
issuing out of the Lands were larger than were expressed in the Rental.
And we find that, shortly after, the Rents of St. _Germains_,
_Northam_, _Ilsington_, &c. part of the New Lands, were received and
accounted for, according to the old Rate in the King’s books, to wit,
162 _l._ 13 _s._ 4 _d._ _per Annum_, in Recompence for the Lands
conveyed to King _Hen._ VIII. and out of which they paid a yearly
Surplusage of 2 _l._ 2 _s._ 1 _d._ This Sum, together with the Rents of
the rest of the New Lands, being upon the said Improvement accounted to
be 597 _l._ 17 _s._ 11 _d._ made in all 600 _l._ _per Annum_; and this
was laid out by the Dean and Canons for some time towards erecting the
Alms-Knights Apartments.

THUS stood the Lands accounted for till the Settlement made by Queen
_Elizabeth_, who in the First Year of her Reign appointed the Dean and
Canons to convert the Rents of these New Lands to such Uses and Intents
as she had set down in a Book signed with her Sign manual, and annexed
to an Indenture made between her and the Dean and Canons; by which
Indenture they were obliged to apply the Rents and Profits of these
Lands, as was prescribed in the Book, and to observe the Ordinances
therein, and upon Default, to abide such Orders as the Crown, or any
Knight-Companion, deputed by the Sovereign, shall set forth.

                                       _l._  _s._  _d._
 In this Book the Total of the Revenue}
     reckon’d at the ancient Value    }  661   06   08

 The Annual Charge and Disbursements  }
     therein set down                 }  430   19   06

                     And so Remains      230   07   02

Which Remainder has been and is assigned for Payment of Tenths to the
Crown, Vicars, Curates, Annual Stipends, Officers Fees, Reparation of
the Premisses, and for the Relief of the Dean and Canons, in
Maintenance and Defence of the said Lands.

AND to the End the Queen might know how the Revenue was disposed of,
she gave charge that her Lieutenant and the Knights-Companions should
annually (at the Feast of the Order held at _Windsor_) state the
Accompt, and see how the Income was expended, and that her Lieutenant
should yearly be put in mind of it by one of the Officers of the Order.
This Ordinance was renewed, 21 _Jac._ I. and the Chancellor of the
Order was appointed to be the Remembrancer, and in Obedience thereunto,
the Account of these new Lands (which begins at _Lady-Day_, as that of
the old Lands doth at _Michaelmas_) was afterwards exhibited in
Chapter, and in particular that Account, 9 _Car._ I. which was
submitted to the Sovereign and Knights-Companion’s Consideration, who
referred the Inspection thereof to the Knights-Commissaries, who were
to consult over the Affairs of the Order.

§. 8. THE Privileges of the Chapel and College are Ecclesiastical and
Temporal: As to the first, Pope _Clement_ VI. exempted the Chapel,
College, Canons, Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights and Officers, from all
ordinary Jurisdiction of Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and all
Judges and Officers, and received them within the Protection of the
Papal-See; and granted a farther Privilege, That the Custos should have
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the Canons, Priests, _&c._ as also the
Cure of their Souls, notwithstanding any Papal Constitution,
Provincial, or Synodical, yet allowing that the Custos should receive
that Cure from the Diocesan of the Place. In Consideration of this
Exemption, the Custos was to pay annually, on St. _George_’s Day, a
Mark in Silver, to the Pope’s Chamber. Two Years preceding, the Chapel
was called the King’s Free Chapel, which Title it still enjoys; for it
owes Subjection to none but the Sovereign of _England_, the Supream of
the Church, as heretofore it stood divided between the King and See of
_Rome_. The Privilege of Exemption included in the Confirmation of
Liberties, made by the Founder in his Charter, dated _Anno Regni sui_
47. and all other Emoluments granted by him, are confirmed by Act of
Parliament, 8 _Hen._ VI. As the College has its sole Dependance on the
Crown, it is visitable only by the Lord-Chancellor, whose Visitations
and Power are reserved to him by the Statutes of the College, and
himself called in the King’s Commission for Visitation, 2 _Rich._ II.
Governor of the said Chapel, as well in Spirituals as Temporals, and,
under the King, immediate Custos. And so jealous were the Dean and
Canons, lest the Power of the said Exemption should be infringed, that
when _Sixtus_ IV. had granted the Bishop of _Salisbury_, and
themselves, to make new and interpret the ancient Statutes, they soon
obtained a Revocation of that Authority, lest the said Bishop (in whose
Diocess the College is situate) being so unpowered, might by Degrees
bring them under his Jurisdiction, in prejudice to their Exemption.
And, _A. D._ 1485. to prevent such design, the Archbishop of
_Canterbury_, &c. were commission’d to see the Bull revoked, and
_Salisbury_ enjoyned not to intermeddle further in the College Affairs.
Moreover other Bishops, and the Chancellor of _England_, were to renew,
alter, or new make such Statutes as might accrue to the Advantage of
the College.

IF the Archbishop of _Canterbury_ be present in the Chapel, he sits
below the Dean, nor can he consecrate there, without his License. And
this is very remarkable, that at the ratifying the Peace between King
_Charles_ I. and _Lewis_ XIII. _A. D._ 1629. in the Chapel at
_Windsor_, Dr. _Wren_, then Dean of the College, gave the Oath to the
_French_ Ambassador, and not the Archbishop of _Canterbury_, tho’ he
was then present.

THE Dean and Chapter are to weigh well and debate at their yearly
Chapters all things fit to be dispatched in reference to the College
Affairs, and whatsoever Determination they come to, not repugnant to
their Statutes, all Persons are firmly obliged to observe.

THE Deans have no Institution from any Bishop, but his Institution,
Investiture, and Installation into the Custos-ship, Canonship, and
Prebendship, is conferred from such of the Canons Resident, to whom the
King (who collates) doth recommend him. Other Marks of Exemption appear
in the constant proving of Wills before him, or in his Absence before
his Lieutenant. In using the Power of Excommunication within their
Jurisdiction (the Precincts of the College) granting a Dispensation for
eating Flesh in _Lent_, a farther Mark of their Privilege appears, that
the Ordination for the Chantry Priests were confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter, and not the Bishop of the Diocess, as were the Statutes of the
new Commons. The Dean is exempt from paying all Synodals, or
Procurations, nor can any of the King’s Chaplains preach in the Chapel
of St. _George_, unless he be a Canon there, or have License from the
King, or from the Dean and Canons. They send no Delegates to the Synod,
and when the Point was debated, 1640. it was carried in the Negative,
as being against their Liberties, and might intitle them to the Payment
of Subsidies; nor are they intitled to any Share in the Government of
the Church, more than the Colleges in the Universities, where there are
many nominal Deans. In short, when by the Act of _Uniformity_, 14
_Car._ II. every Clergyman was bound to subscribe before the Archbishop
or his Ordinary, the Canons subscribed before the Dean; and tho’ some
of them subscribed before the Bishop, yet was it with a Salvo, saving
the Rights and Privileges of this Free Chapel.

THEIR Temporal Immunities and Privileges are these, as granted them by
Charter, 6 _Mar._ 27 _Edw._ III. and confirmed by several of his
Successors.

THE Custos and Canons were free from paying Aid upon making the King’s
eldest Son a Knight, and marrying his eldest Daughter, and exempt of
all Aids to the King’s Contributions and Tallages.

WHENSOEVER the Clergy should give a Tenth, or other Imposition, out of
their Spiritualties, or the Commons give a Tenth, Fifteenth, or other,
out of their Temporalties, Subsidy, or the King tax his own Demean, or
the Pope impose any Money to be raised upon the Clergy, to give it the
King, this College and their Possessions were to stand freed thereof.

THEY were discharged from any Contributions of arraying Soldiers, and
from sending them to guard the Sea-Coasts, and from every Fine and
Composition of the like Nature. Their Houses within the Castle of
_Windsor_, as elsewhere, are quit from any Livery of the King’s and
Queen’s Stewards, Marshals, Purveyors, Officers, and Servants, and from
the like Officers of the Peers or Nobles, and the said Officers were
not to intermeddle there, without Leave of the Custos and Canons.

NO Duke, _&c._ or Nobleman, nor any Stewards, Marshals, Escheators,
Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, or Officers, nor other Person of what
Condition soever, upon any Pretence, were not to lodge or remain in
their Houses without their Consent.

THE Custos, Canons, and their Tenants, were not to pay any Toll,
Paviage, Piccage, Barbicanage, Terrage, Pontage, Murage, Passage,
Payage, Lestage, Stallage, Tallage, Carriage, Pesage, and from Scot and
Geld, Hidage, Scutage, working about Castles, Parks, Bridges, Walls for
the King’s Houses; and from Suits to the County, or Hundred Courts, and
Wapentakes, or Court Leets, Murder, and common Amerciaments, before
either King, Justices of the Bench, or Itinerant, and from every like
Custom had an Immunity.

WITHIN their Lands, Fees, and Precincts, the Chattels of all Felons and
Fugitives were seized to their own Use. All Fines for Trespasses, and
all other Contempts and Misdemeanors, _Fines pro licentia concordandi_,
and for all other Causes, Amerciaments, Redemptions, Issues, and
Forfeitures whatsoever, _Annum Diem Vastum & Streppum_, and all Things
which might belong to the King and his Heirs, and all Wrecks, Waifs,
and Strays, were granted them.

NO Purveyance of Corn, Hay, Horses, Carts, Carriages, Victuals, or any
Goods, Chattels, or any thing whatsoever, should be carried off by any
of the King’s Officers, upon their or their Tenants Land.

THEY were to be free from paying any Pension, Corrody, or other
Sustentation to be granted to the Crown.

THEY were to have free Warren in all their Demain Lands wheresoever,
and that altho’ they lay within the Bounds of the King’s Forest.

THAT they should enjoy for their Conveniency a weekly Market on
_Wednesday_, at their Mannor of _Ever_ in _Bucks_, and Two Fairs to
last Eight Days, one on the Eve and Feast of St. _Peter_ and St.
_Paul_, and Two Days after the other, upon the Eve and Feast of St.
_Peter ad Vincula_, and Two Days following.

THAT they should, in all their Lands have Socage and Sackage,
Infangthef, Utfangthef, and View of Frankpledge, with Thewe, Pillory,
and Tumbrel for punishing Malefactors, and Power to erect Gallows upon
their own Soil for executing those apprehended in their Jurisdiction.

THEY were to be exempt of all Suits and Pleas of the Forest, and of all
Charges or Fees which the Officers of the Forest might demand, and from
the Expeditation of their Dogs and Suits of Court there; as likewise
all from Gelds, _Dane_ Gelds, Knights Fees, Payments for Murder and
Robbery, Building or Repairing of Bridges, Castles, Parks, Pools,
Walls, Sea Banks, Causeways, and Inclosures; and of all Assizes,
Summonses, Sheriffs Aids, their Bailiffs, or Officers, bearing of
Treasure, and all other Aids whatever; as also from the common
Assessments and Amerciaments of the County, and Hundred, and all
Actions relating to them; they were discharged from the Payment of
Ward-penny, Aver-penny, Tithing-penny, and Hundred-penny, and quit from
Grithbreck, Forestal, Homesoken, Blodwite, Wardwite, Hangwite,
Fightwite, Leyrwite, Lastage, Pannage, Assurt, and Waste of the Forest;
so that such Waste be not committed in the Forests, Parks, and Woods
belonging to the Crown, and then reasonable Satisfaction, without
Imprisonment, should be accepted.

ALL Writs and Attachments were returnable to them, as well relating to
the Pleas of the Crown as other, thro’ all their Lands and Fees, and no
Sheriff, Bailiff, or Officer, should execute any such there, unless in
Default of the Custos and Canons, and they to have and hold Leets, and
Lawdays, and Cognizance of all Pleas betwixt their Tenants, as well of
Trespasses and Contracts, as others. And lastly, They were to have and
hold Wards, Reliefs, Escheats, Forfeitures, and other Profits, Issues,
and Emoluments whatsoever, within their own Fees, from all their
Tenants, which might appertain to the Crown, as if the Tenants did hold
of the Crown or others _in Capite_.




                                CAP. V.


WE come now to treat of the most Noble and Illustrious _Order of the
Garter_; which, if we consider either its Antiquity, or the Nobleness
of the Personages, that have been enroll’d, it excels and outvies all
other Institutions of Honour in the whole World. It owes its Original,
as is confessed on all Hands, to _Edward_ III. King of _England_ and
_France_; yet as to the Occasion, there are several Opinions which we
shall rectifie. The vulgar and more general is, that the Garter of
_Joan_, Countess of _Salisbury_, dropping casually off as she danced in
a solemn Ball, King _Edward_ stooping took it up from the Ground,
whereupon some of his Nobles smiling, as at an amorous Action, and he
observing their sportive Humour, turned it off with a Reply in
_French_, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_; but withal added, in disdain of
their Laughter, _That shortly they should see that Garter advanced to
so high an Honour and Renown as to account themselves happy to wear it_.

BUT upon Examination of this Tradition, let others judge what Credit it
bears to establish its Belief; for Sir _John Froissart_, the only
Writer of the Age that treats of this Institution, assigns no such
Original, nor for 200 Years after is there any thing to the Purpose in
our other Historians, till _Polydore Virgil_ took occasion to say
something of it; but had it been Fact, some _French_ Historian or
other, would not have neglected to register it at a convenient Time
with a Scoff and Ridicule, since that Nation was so ready to deride
King _Henry_ V’s Design of invading them with a Return of Tennis Balls.

IN the Original Statutes of this Order, there is not the least
Conjecture to countenance the Conceit of such a Feminine Institution,
no not so much as laying an Obligation on the Knights-Companions to
defend the Quarrels of Ladies (as some Orders then in being enjoyned;)
nor doth the Author of that Tract entitled _Institutio clarissimi
Ordinis Militaris a prænobili subligaculo nuncupati_, prefaced to the
Black Book of the _Garter_, let fall the manifest Passage to ground it
on.

AS to what _Polydore_ says, he is not so confident to ascertain the
Person whose Garter it was; but cautiously declining that, says, it was
either the Queen’s, or the King’s Mistress’s; and if it were the
latter, yet doth he omit her Name and Title, both which (on what
Authority we find not) are supplied by modern Historians, who call her
_Joan_ Countess of _Salisbury_, the same elsewhere celebrated by the
Name of the _Fair Maid_ of _Kent_, (whom _Edward_ the Black Prince,
afterward married) whereas no Historian ever gave the least Inuendo
that King _Edward_ III. ever courted her as a Mistress. _Selden_ points
at her when he calls the Lady, from whom the Garter slipp’d, Countess
of _Kent_ and _Salisbury_: But about the Time when this Order was
founded she in truth was dignified with neither Honour; for altho’ she
was Daughter to _Tho._ of _Woodstock_, Earl of _Kent_, and had been
sometime the reputed Wife of _William Mountague_, second Earl of
_Salisbury_, yet then she cou’d not properly be accounted Countess of
_Salisbury_. She was actually Wife to Sir _Thomas Holland_, (one of the
First Founders of the Order.) Nor was she yet (tho’ afterwards)
Countess of Kent, because her Brother _John_ Earl of _Kent_, at the
Institution of this Order, survived, and died not till 26 _Edw._ III.

THAT there was a Countess of _Salisbury_ with whom King _Edward_ III.
became greatly enamour’d, _Froissart_ reports after this manner, _That
this King having relieved a Castle of that Earl’s in the North, wherein
his Countess had been besieged by the_ Scots (_the Earl himself being
at that time Prisoner in_ France;) _upon sight of her extraordinary
Beauty he fell in love with her; but she so virtuously demeaned her
self, during his Abode there, that he declined further Solicitation_.
However, some time after, the King out of Desire to see her, proclaim’d
solemn Justs in _London_, whither this Countess and other Ladies being
invited, came up. This Castle it seems was _Wark_ upon _Tweed_ in
_Northumberland_, which King _Edward_ had formerly bestowed on her
Husband, for his good Service past, when he first espoused her, being
then but a Knight.

ALTHO’ it should be admitted that this Countess of _Salisbury_ was the
King’s Mistress, yet must it be remark’d, That she was Wife to _William
Mountague_, Kt. created Earl of _Salisbury_, _Anno_ 11 _Edw._ III.
Mother to _William_ the before-mention’d second Earl, that her
Christian Name was _Catherine_, not _Alice_, as _Froissart_, not
_Joan_, as others call her, Daughter to _William_ Lord _Granston_, and
that she expired 28 _Edw._ III. But that the whole may appear, what
indeed it is, a meer Fable, we shall insert the Judgment of Dr.
_Heylin_, who took great Pains in this Particular. _This_, says he, _I
take to be a vain and idle Romance, derogatory both to the Founder and
the Order first published by_ Pol. Virgil, _a Stranger to the Affairs
of_ England, _and by him taken upon no better ground than_ Fama Vulgi,
_the Tradition of the common People, too trifling a Foundation to so
great a Building_.

OF the same Contexture with the former is another Tradition in _Andrew
du Chesne_, _That the Queen departing from the King to her own
Apartments, and he following soon after, chanced to espy a Blue Garter
lying on the Ground (supposed to have slipp’d from her Leg) whilst some
of his Attendants carelesly passed by it, as disdaining to stoop at
such a Trifle; but he knowing the Owner, commanded it to be given him;
at the Receipt of which he said, You make but small account of this
Garter; but within few Months, I’ll cause the best of you all to
reverence it alike_. Some suppose that the Motto was the Queen’s
Answer, when the King asked her, _What Men would conjecture of her,
upon her losing her Garter in such a manner?_

BOTH Relations are far distant from Fact; nevertheless it has thus
far’d with other Orders of Sovereign Foundation, and an amorous,
instead of an honourable Account, has been falsly render’d of their
Institution; as for Instance, _The Order of the_ Annunciade, and that
of _The Golden Fleece_.

THERE is a third Opinion grounded on a Relation made of King _Rich._ I.
who, whilst his Forces were employ’d against _Cyprus_ and _Acon_, and
extremely tir’d and harrass’d with the Siege, he, by the Assistance and
Mediation of St. _George_ (as imagin’d) was inspir’d with fresh
Courage, and bethought himself of a new Device, which was to tie about
the Legs of a Number of Knights, a Leathern Thong Garter, for such had
he then at hand, whereby they being emulated to future Glory, with
Assurance of Reward if they prov’d victorious, they might be excited to
behave themselves intrepidly and well, much after the Examples of the
old _Romans_, among whom were distributed various Crowns for several
Causes, to adorn the Soldiers: But if King _Richard_ I. did make use of
this Device in the _Holy Land_, as a Signal or Mark of Distinction of a
Party, upon some warlike Exploit, yet that he took Occasion to create a
distinct Order of Knighthood thereupon, there is not sufficient warrant
to believe; (for it is only put down in the Preface of the _Black
Book_, but not in any Part of the Annals of the Order; nor can it plead
higher Antiquity than the Reign of King _Hen._ VIII. when written.) All
the Advantage that can be made of it, is, to heighten the Reputation of
that Saint among the _English_, by which Means the Garter came to be
dedicated to him, and not that it contributed to its Institution.


§ 2. THE true Motive was therefore, neither the Ladies Garter, or King
_Richard_’s Leathern Thong, that it owes it Original to: But King
_Edward_, being a Person of consummate Vertue, gave himself up to
military Affairs; and being engag’d in War for recovering his Right to
_France_, made use of the best Martialists of the Age, did thereupon
first design (induc’d by its ancient Fame) the Restoration of King
_Arthur_’s _Round Table_, to invite hither the Gallant Spirits from
abroad, and endear them to himself; and adjudging no Place more
requisite than _Windsor_, upon _New-Year’s-Day_, _A. D._ 1344. he
issu’d out Letters of Protection for the safe going and return of
Foreign Knights, to try their Valour at the Solemn Justs to be held
there on _Monday_ after the Feast of St. _Hilary_ following (which
happen’d _Jan._ 19.) And these Letters of Safe-Conduct continu’d in
force until the _Octaves_ of the Purification of our blessed Virgin
ensuing, being the 18th Year of his Reign. At the Time appointed, he
provided a great Supper to begin the Solemnity, and then ordain’d this
Festival to be annually at _Whitsontide_; and immediately after these
first Exercises were over, for a future and better Accommodation, he
impress’d Workmen and Carriages for erecting a particular Building in
the Castle, and therein plac’d a Table of Two Hundred Foot Diameter,
where the Knights should have their Entertainment of Diet, at his
Expence of 100 _l._ _per_ Week; to which Building he gave the Name of
_The Round Table_. And as at these great Conventions the Days were
spent in all Kinds of noble Feats of Arms, Justs and Turnaments, so
were a great Part of the Nights consum’d in publick Balls and dancing
with the Ladies that attended the Queen thither; and perhaps it was
hence conjectur’d, that at some of these Balls the Queen’s Garter, or
the Garter of _Catherine_, Countess of _Salisbury_, might slip off, and
the King’s taking it up occasion Smiles in the Bystanders; and
afterwards, when the King had modell’d his intended Order, a Garter
offering it self for its chief Ensign, might add to the Conjecture; but
that it was the principal Cause, is a groundless Imagination. And tho’
King _Edward_ advanc’d the Honour of the Garter, as to denominate the
Order, yet was it not to enhance Reputation to, or perpetuate an
effeminate Occasion, but to adorn Martial Prowess, with Honours,
Rewards and Splendor; to increase Vertue and Valour in the Hearts of
his Nobility, that so true Worth, after long and hazardous Exploits,
should not enviously be depriv’d of that Glory which it hath
intrinsically deserv’d, and that active and hardy Youths might not want
a Spur in their Progression in the Paths of Vertue, which is to be
esteem’d glorious and eternal.

IT is further observable, that the _French_ King, _Philip de Valoys_,
in Emulation of this Seminary at _Windsor_, set up a _Round Table_ at
his Court, and invited Knights and valiant Men of Arms out of _Italy_
and _Almaine_ thither, lest they should repair to our King _Edward_
III. which meeting with Success, prov’d a Countermine to his main
Design; who perceiving that his Hospitality towards strange Knights,
upon Account of reviving King _Arthur_’s _Round Table_ was too general,
nor did sufficiently ingratiate them to his Person, but being
unconstrain’d and at Liberty, did after their Departure take what Side
they pleas’d in the ensuing Wars, he at length resolv’d upon a
Projection more particular and select, and such as might oblige those
whom he thought fit to make his Associates, in a lasting Bond of
Friendship and Honour: And having issu’d forth his own Garter for the
Signal of a Battle, that was crown’d with Success, (which is conceiv’d
to be the Battle of _Cressy_, fought about Three Years after his
erecting the _Round Table_;) upon so remarkable a Victory, he thence
took Occasion to institute this Order, and gave the Garter Preheminence
among the Ensigns of it, whence that select Number, whom he
incorporated into a Fraternity, are styl’d _Equites Aureæ
Periscelidis_, and vulgarly _Knights of the Garter_. By this Symbol he
design’d to bind the Knights and Fellows of it mutually unto one
another, and all of them joyntly to himself, as Sovereign of the Order;
nor was his Expectation frustrated, for it did not serve only as a
vehement Spur and Incentive to Honour and martial Vertue, but also as a
golden Bond of Unity and internal Society; and for this Consideration
_Cambden_ aptly calls it a Badge of Unity and Concord.

BY the Symbols of this Garter the Knights are reminded, with all
Religiousness, Sincerity, Friendliness, Faithfulness and Dexterity, not
to leave the Pursuit of whatsoever they take in hand, nor to enterprize
any Thing contrary to the Statutes of the Order; neither to frustrate
the Rights of Peace and Friendship, nor vilify the Law of Arms, or
proceed in any Thing farther than Faith and Compact, or the Bond of
Friendship will admit. Moreover, in the binding of the Leg with this
enobled Ensign, there was given this Caveat and Exhortation, that the
Knights should not pusillanimously (by running away from Battle) betray
the Valour and Renown which is ingrafted in Constancy and Magnanimity.
Nay, so exactly did the Founder contrive the whole Habit into the
Signification of the Garter, that he ordain’d his and the
Knights-Companions Robes and Ornaments to be all alike, both for
Materials and Fashion, intimating thereby, That they ought to conserve
brotherly Affection among themselves. The great Collar of the Order was
made of equal Weight, and like Number of Knots and Links, in Token of
the like Bond of Faith, Peace and Amity inviolably to be observ’d and
retain’d amongst them: In fine, all Things were so design’d, that every
one might plainly perceive how much these Things tended to the
Maintenance of Amity and Concord.

IN further reference to the establishing this Order, the aforesaid
King calling together the Earls, Barons, and principal Knights of his
Kingdom, _Freely_, says _Froissart_, _and obligingly declar’d his
Mind to them concerning this Affair_: To which _all of them being
well inclin’d, entertain’d the Motion with equal Joy and Applause,
deeming it would prove a very great Advancement to Piety, Nobility
and Vertue, and likewise an excellent Expedient for the uniting not
only his Subjects one with another, but all Foreigners conjunctively
with them, in the Bonds of Amity and Peace_. And ’tis very improbable
the prudent Founder should summon his Nobles to consult about the
Grandeur of an Order, that had taken its Rise from so slight an
Occasion as the dropping of a Garter from a Lady’s Leg. Now, to draw
the Tye of Friendship more close, the King caused those who were (or
should be) of the Order, to be call’d _Fellows_, _Associates_,
_Colleagues_, _Brethren_, and _Knights-Companions_, and the Order it
self a _Society_, _Fellowship_, _College of Knights_, and
_Knight-Companionship_; and their Habits to be all alike, to
represent how they ought to be united in all Chances and various
Turns of Fortune; Co-partners both in Peace and War, assistant to one
another in all serious and dangerous Exploits; and thro’ the whole
Course of their Lives to shew Fidelity and Friendliness one towards
another. There are other Reasons assign’d, much to the same Effect,
That the Order was instituted _to fortifie the Confidence of the
King, the Kingdom and Martial Vertue_; that is to say, _to strengthen
the Faith of the Subjects towards them, and for their greater
Security_, and _because the Garter carries with it a Bond or Tye of
Fellowship, and is a Symbol of Amity between Princes, being
Companions of the same Order_.

IN the last Place, if we look upon the Statutes of its Institution, we
shall find the Injunctions wholly Military, and so are the Words of
Admonition pronounc’d at the putting on the Ensigns of the Order: And
the Ground of the Institution (in the Preamble to King _Henry_ VIII’s
_Exemplar_) is said to be _for the Honour of God and Exaltation of the
Catholick Faith, joyn’d both with Piety and Charity, in establishing a
College of religious Men to pray for the Prosperity of the Sovereign of
the Order and the Knights-Companions, and to perform other holy
Duties_; as also _ordaining a Maintenance for a Company of
Alms-Knights, who have not otherwise wherewith to support themselves_;
but not one Word relating to the Engagement on behalf of the feminine
Sex.

AND whereas King _Edw._ III. had laid Claim by his Title to the Kingdom
of _France_, and in Right thereof assum’d its Arms, he from the Colour
of them, ’tis said, caus’d the Garter to be made Blue, and the
Circumscription Gold: And it may, without straining, be inferr’d from
the Motto, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_, that he retorted Shame and
Defiance upon him that should dare to think amiss of so just an
Enterprize, as he had undertaken for recovering of his lawful Right to
that Crown; and that the Magnanimity and Bravery of those Knights, whom
he had elected into this Order, was such as would impower and enable
them to maintain the Quarrel against all who thought ill of it.
Consonant to this is the Conjecture of _Harpsfield_, that this
Apophthegm was design’d to put the Knights-Companions in mind, _Not to
admit any Thing in their Actions, or among their Thoughts, derogatory
to themselves and their Honour_.

THAT Age did exceedingly abound with Impresses, Motto’s and Devices,
and particularly King _Edw._ III. was so excessively given up to them,
that his Apparel, Plate, Bed, Houshold-Furniture, Shields, and even the
Harness of his Horses, and the like, were not without them, many of
which now to descant upon would be a fruitless Attempt, seeing the
Occasion of the Invention, and the Circumstances are lost, that should
illustrate them; and others, by reason of their Brevity, seem’d
insignificant, in regard something was designedly omitted, and left to
be understood, which cannot now be rightly supply’d, so as to arrive at
the Mind of the Inventor. Of this Number may be this Motto, _It is as
it is_, which was embroider’d upon a Doublet of that King; tho’ there
are others which seem more easy to be decypher’d; as that daring Motto
wrought upon his Surcoat and Shield provided to be used at a Turnament,

                      #Hay, Hay, the Wythe Swan;
                      By God’s Soul I am the Man.#


§ 3. THE Time when the Order was instituted, Historians differ widely
about; _Selden_, _Cowper_, and others, from _Froissart_ (who wrote
_temp. Rich._ II.) would have it in the 18th of King _Edw._ III. But
since _Froissart_ errs, in making the Number of Knights-Companions no
fewer than Forty, which is a grand Mistake, Why might not he trip in
Point of Time, and confound the Year of its Erection, with that wherein
the Founder renew’d the Order of _The Round Table_, _Windsor_ being the
Place for both. For should we admit, that during some Part of the
Solemnity held in this King’s 18th Year, when the Accident of the
Lady’s Garter slipping off happen’d, what other Inference can be made,
but that he had only an Intention to put in Execution somewhat
afterwards? Not that an Order was actually erected at that Time:
Besides, the Jollity of the Season, the Greatness of the Concourse, and
the Splendidness of the Festivity, it was too busy a Time to suffer
much Consultation tending thereunto; or at least to mould and model a
Design so compleat and substantial, as it appears to have been even at
first. If we joyn _Fabian_, he is plain, that tho’ the King design’d
the Institution at the End of the Festival, (which he places between
_Candlemas_ and _Lent_, in the 19th, and not 18th Year of that King)
_Yet was it not then_, saith he, _but afterwards establish’d by him_.
Nevertheless, Mr. _Selden_ elsewhere observes, it had its Original in
the 24th Year of the said King. And our industrious _Stow_ (with whom
_Lily_, _Speed_, and _Segar_ agree) tells us, _That the first Feast of
the Order was celebrated_ A. D. 1350. which exactly agrees to the 24th
of _Edward_ III. But _Polydore Virgil_ places it after the 25th of
_Edward_ III. We must therefore have recourse to some other Proofs for
elucidating this Point, since this Chronological _Æra_ of the true Time
of its Institution hath wonderfully slipp’d the Pens of all Writers.

ADMITTING then that the erecting this Order was first thought of by
King _Edward_, at some of those grand Assemblies of _The Round Table_,
held after the _French_ King had set up the like; yet was it not
mature, or brought to any Perfection, till after his glorious Victories
and Triumphs over the _French_ and _Scots_ in the Battles of _Cressy_
and _Nevil_’s Cross, (in the last of which the _Scotch_ King, _David_,
was taken Prisoner) and until King _Edward_ had _Calais_ surrendred to
him, as will appear very conspicuous.

AMONG the Rolls of the Great Wardrobe, is one containing the Account of
all the King’s Liveries, from _Michaelmas Anno_ 21, to the 31st of
_Jan._ 23 _Edw._ III. In the same are divers Things mention’d to be
adorn’d with Garters, which were provided against the first grand Feast
of St. _George_; and among the rest, the Royal Robes, _viz._ his
Mantle, Surcoat and Hood; likewise a Bed of Blue Taffaty was bedeck’d
with Garters, containing the Motto, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_. There
were made for the Sovereign Three Harnesses, whereof Two were of White
Velvet, wrought over with Garters _de blu & diaspris per totum
compedmein cum Woodhouses_; and the Third _de Velvetto Ynde cont.
Lappekin quisseux & caligas_, wrought over likewise with Garters. Had
the Roll been divided into Years, or had distinguishing Marks of Time
upon it, we might have been guided with more Certainty as to the true
Year of the Institution. However, we may thence conclude it was not
founded in the 18th of _Edw._ III. because that the Sovereign’s Robes
were not made until the 22d Year of his Reign at soonest; perhaps not
till the Beginning of the 23d. But to put the Matter beyond dispute,
the Founder’s Statutes fix the Time of Institution to his 23d Year; so
do the Statutes of King _Henry_ V. and the Preface to the _Black Book_,
_Leland_, _Mills_ and Dr. _Heylin_. To conclude, when he had fix’d upon
the Day and Place for celebrating the first grand Feast of this Order,
he sent his Heralds into _Germany_, _France_, _Scotland_, _Burgundy_,
_Hainault_, _Flanders_ and _Brabant_, to invite all Knights and
Esquires, (with Assurance of Safe-Conduct and Liberty for Fifteen Days,
both before and after the grand Solemnity) to shew their military
Prowess and other publick Exercises there to be perform’d, proper to
the Place and Occasion; agreeable to which Invitation, sundry Knights
and Gallant Men came over to signalize their Valour; and what made the
Solemnity more glorious, King _Edward_’s Queen was there present,
attended with Three Hundred of the fairest Ladies, in all imaginable
Splendor and Gaity.


§ 4. THE Patrons of the Order were several, under whose Protection
(according to the Custom of the Age) King _Edw._ III. put himself and
all the Knights-Companions, that the Affairs of the Order might be
defended, preserved and govern’d.

THE _first_ and chiefest which he elected, was the _Holy Trinity_,
which in a more especial Manner was invocated to the Aid and Assistance
of this Order.

_Secondly_, King _Edward_ III. intitled peculiarly the _blessed Virgin_
Mary, accounted then the general Mediatrix and Protectress of all Men;
unto whom King _Edward_ IV. was so strictly devoted, that he thought
some additional Ceremonies requisite to her farther Honour, and
thereupon ordain’d, that on her Five Solemnities the Knights Companions
should annually (as accustom’d on the Feast of St. _George_) wear the
Habit of the Order as long as Divine Service was celebrating, (unless
they had sufficient Cause of excuse) bearing on the right Shoulders of
their Robes a golden Figure of the Virgin _Mary_; and that they should
go in the same Manner and Habit upon all _Sundays_ throughout the Year;
and lastly, that on the same Days for ever they should say Five _Pater
Nosters_, with as many _Ave Maria’s_.

_Thirdly_, St. _George_ of _Cappadocia_, a most choice Champion of
Christ and famous Martyr, was also elected one of the Patrons to this
Order by King _Edward_ III. not so much as he was a Professor of the
Christian Faith, or for that he was an armed Soldier or Knight of
Christ, but so much the more because in those Wars, which were waged by
the Christians against the Infidels, he by several Appearances
manifested his Presence as a most certain Encourager and Assistant to
the Christians; the Relations whereof may be seen in Dr. _Heylin_’s
History, who hath laboriously and judiciously maintain’d the History of
this Saint, against those that will not allow him a Place in Heaven, or
a Being in the Church. In like manner the learned _Selden_ hath
avouch’d him to be the special Patron, Protector, Defender, and
Advocate of this Realm of _England_; and has made it plainly appear in
what Veneration he hath been honour’d abroad, especially among the
Eastern Nations. To whose corroborating Testimonies we shall add, That
this Title of Patron to our Nation, as given to St. _George_ by the
Founder of this Order, in a Patent granted to the Dean and Canons of
the Chapel of St. _Stephen_ at _Westminster_, and St. _George_ at
_Windsor_, which dischargeth them from Payment of Tythes; as also by
King _Henry_ VIII. in the Preamble of his Statutes. And tho’ in general
he is styl’d the Principal Patron of the Affairs of _Christendom_, and
a tutelar Guardian of military Men, yet among all Christians the
_English_ did excel; and in this Nation the Founder of this Order, in
making choice of such an approv’d expert Captain and Patron, in
particular Respect of whom the Knights had the Title of _Equites
Georgiani_, St. _George_’s Knights, and the Order it self came to be
call’d the _Ordo Divi Sancti Georgii_, The Order of St. _George_.

IT is remarkable, that _Du Chesne_, a noted _French_ Historian,
acknowledges it was by the special Invocation of St. _George_ that King
_Edward_ III. gain’d the Battle of _Cressy_, which afterwards bringing
to his Remembrance, _He founded_, says he, _a Chapel within the Castle
of_ Windsor. But if we may ascend a step higher, and give credit to
_Harding_, it’s recorded King _Arthur_ paid St. _George_ particular
Honours, for he advanc’d his Picture in one of his Banners, which was
about Two Hundred Years after his Martyrdom, and very early for a
Country so remote from _Cappadocia_ to have him in Reverence and Esteem.

_Lastly_, The Founder added a fourth Patron, whose Name himself bore,
_viz._ St. _Edward the Confessor_, his Predecessor, King of _England_;
and we find he was wont to be invocated by this Founder, as well as St.
_George_, in any great Difficulties and Streights. _Walsingham_ gives
an Instance at the Skirmish of _Calais_, _A. D._ 1349. when King
_Edward_, in great Anger and Grief, drew out his Sword, and most
passionately cry’d out, _Ha St._ Edward, _Ha St._ George; which his
Soldiers hearing, ran presently to him, and rushing violently upon the
Enemy, put many of them to the Sword. These Four Patrons we find
recorded together in the Preamble of the Foundation of _Windsor_
College by King _Edward_ III. tho’ in the Preamble to his Statutes of
the Order, and to King _Henry_ V’s Statutes, St. _Edward the Confessor_
is omitted; nevertheless he is enumerated with the rest in the Preamble
to King _Henry_ VIII’s.


§ 5. AS to the Honour and Reputation of this Noble Order, either in
Comparison with others, or in Reference to it self, it challenges the
Precedency of Antiquity, before the eldest Rank of Honour of that Kind
any where establish’d.

_Secondly_, The Statutes of the Foundation were so exquisitely and
judiciously devised and compacted, upon such solid Foundations of
Honour and Nobleness, that they afterwards became a Precedent to other
Orders; and gave the Plan to those Two of _The Golden Fleece_ and of
Monsieur St. _Michael_, as is manifest by comparing their Statutes.

_Thirdly_, It is no small Honour that accrues to this Order, that the
Number of these Knights-Companions were never encreas’d, but as they
were Twenty Six with the Sovereign, so they now thus continue, _ut
Pretium faciat raritas_; for the infringing this Article hath split
several other military Orders into Contempt and Ruin, as nothing more
tarnishing, or throwing a sully on the Worth of Glory and Honour, than
when render’d so vulgar, and indifferently disposed without Distinction
and Merit, as is exemplify’d in _The Order of the_ Star, and the now
declining _Order of St._ Michael.

_Fourthly_, It has receiv’d more additional Lustre by being honour’d
with the Companionship of divers Emperors, Kings and Sovereign Princes,
who esteem’d it the Summit of their Glory, and the highest Trophy of
additional Honour, to be enroll’d in the Number. Insomuch that some of
them with Impatience courted the Election. For we find recorded in the
Register, _A. D._ 1672. Eight Emperors of _Germany_, Three Kings of
_Spain_, Five _French_ Kings, Two Kings of _Scotland_, Five Kings of
_Denmark_, Five Kings of _Portugal_, Two Kings of _Sweden_, One King of
_Poland_, One King of _Arragon_, Two Kings of _Naples_, besides divers
Dukes and other free Princes; as One Duke of _Guelderland_, One Duke of
_Holland_, Two Dukes of _Burgundy_, Two Dukes of _Brunswick_, One Duke
of _Milan_, Two Dukes of _Urbin_, One Duke of _Ferrara_, One Duke of
_Savoy_, Two Dukes of _Holstein_, One Duke of _Saxony_, and One Duke of
_Wertemberg_, Seven Count Palatines of the _Rhine_, Four Princes of
_Orange_, and One Marquis of _Brandenburg_.

_Fifthly_, It entitles those Knights and Noblemen, whose Vertue hath
rais’d them to this Pitch of Greatness, to be Companions and Associates
with Emperors and Kings, a Prerogative of an high Nature, and a
sufficient Recompence for the greatest Merit. We shall close up all
with the high Elogy bestow’d on it by the learned _Selden_, _That it
exceeds in Majesty, Honour and Fame, all Chivalrous Orders of the
World_.




                                CAP. VI.

                _The Statutes and Annals of the Order._


ORDER and Regularity is not only the Beauty and Symmetry of Government
and Societies, but also greatly contributes to their Establishment and
Perpetuity. Statutes and Rules are as well the Bounds to determine, as
Bonds to unite Fellowship and Societies together; and if either fall
into disuse, or be unadvisedly broken, they open a Field to Dissolution
and Ruin.

SUCH like Considerations mov’d and excited the victorious King _Edward_
III. (after he had determin’d the Erection of this most renown’d _Order
of the Garter_) to _devise and institute several laudable Statutes and
Ordinances, to be duly observ’d and kept within the said Order_; which
being collected into one Body, are call’d _The Statutes of Institution_.

THE Original of these was ordain’d to be kept within the Treasury of
the College of _Windsor_, but hath long since wholly perish’d; yet a
Transcript of them is recorded in the Reign of King _Henry_ V. in an
old Book call’d _Registrum Ordinis Chartaceum_. Two more ancient
_Exemplars_ of this Body of Statutes are also in being; the one in the
Library of the Lord _Hatton_, and the other in the _Black Book_ of the
Order; and comparing them together, I shall here give from the _Latin_
the Heads they consist of.


1. THE King of _England_, his Heirs and Successors, are to be
Sovereigns or Superiors of this Order.

2. NONE are to be admitted, unless he be a Gentleman of Blood, and that
he be a Knight and without Reproach.

3. THE Knights-Companions were to be Twenty Six, each to have at
_Windsor_ a Mantle and Garter for the better Splendor of the Order; to
wear the said Habit whensoever they go to the Chapel of St. _George_ or
Chapter-House, to hold a Chapter, or do any thing relating to their
Order. In like manner they are to wear the Habit upon the Vigils of St.
_George_, in their Procession from the King’s Lodgings to the Chapel or
Chapter-House, and returning back, and during Supper, continue so
habited till it be over, and likewise on the Morrow of St. _George_’s
Day, at Chapel, Dinner-time, Supper-time, and afterwards all the said
Day, until the Sovereign or his Deputy shall deposite the Ensigns of
the Order, and decree their Departure.

4. THERE were to be Thirteen Canons Secular, who at the Time of their
Institution, or within a Year, were to be Priests, and as many Vicars
already Priests, or to be made so at the next Ordination, answerable to
the number of the Knights-Companions; these religious Persons to be
presented by the several Founders each one, and upon the Death or
Vacancy of such presented, the Sovereign of the Order ever afterwards
to have the Nomination of them, who were bound to pray for the good
Estate of the Sovereign and his Kingdom, and particularly for this
Order.

5. THE Canons were to wear a Purple Mantle, with the Arms of St.
_George_ in a Roundle upon their right Shoulder.

6. THERE were to be Twenty Six poor veterane Knights, each to have a
competent Subsistence, their Election to be after the manner of the
Canons aforesaid.

7. THESE Knights were to have a Red Mantle, with the Arms of St.
_George_; but without any Circle of the Garter about it.

8. IF the Sovereign could not be present at the solemn Festival of St.
_George_, his Deputy was to supply his Place at the Charge of the
Sovereign; but such Deputy was not to make any new Ordinances, tho’ he
has License to correct or amend the old Ones.

9. EVERY Year, upon the Vigils of St. _George_, the Knights-Companions
within the Realm, or elsewhere, if conveniently, are to assemble, at
_Windsor_ Castle, and be present there at the Celebration of Divine
Service, in the Habit of the Order, where placed regularly in their
Stalls or Seats, directly over their Heads their Helmets and Swords,
_&c._ are to be hung up, and remain as long as such Knights live, in
Honour of them, and to signify the Defence of the Church, to which they
are obliged as a Military Order; but in case the Feast of St. _George_
happens to fall within the Quindene or Fifteen Days after the Feast of
_Easter_, then it was to be prorogued to the _Sunday_ next following,
accounting Fifteen Days from _Easter_ Day, that every Knight-Companion
might have reasonable time to come, nor be forced to ride upon any of
the Three _Easter_ Holy-days.

10. THAT they meet in St. _George_’s Chapel yearly, on the Eve of St.
_George_, at the Hour of Three in the Afternoon; and if they come not
at the Time assigned, without a just Excuse, which the Sovereign or his
Deputy allows, their Penalty is to be according to the Ordinance of the
Chapter; which is, That they shall not enter into the Chapter Door for
that time, but stay without, and shall have no Voice in any thing that
is done in the said Chapter; and if they come not before the Beginning
of Vespers, they shall not enter into their Stalls, but shall tarry
below before the said Stalls in the Choiristers Places during Vespers.
The like Penalty is ordain’d for not coming to the Mass or
Morning-Service betime, and at Vespers, on St. _George_’s Day; and
whosoever shall absent himself wholly from this Solemnity, without
sufficient Excuse and Leave from the Sovereign or Deputy, he is not to
enter within his Stall the next Feast after, but shall stay below, and
before his Stall, as it is said at Vespers, and in the Morrows
Procession must walk before the Three processional Crosses, [now the
Choiristers,] and at Mass [Service] shall sit below until the Offering,
and he to offer last. After which he is to come before the Sovereign,
or his Deputy’s Stall, and ask Pardon, which re-instates him in his
Stall. Absenting the next second Time upon the Feast, without Leave, he
has no Stall allowed him until he hath given and offered a Jewel upon
St. _George_’s Altar, to the Value of Twenty Marks, which is to be
double every Year until a Reconciliation.

11. WHERESOEVER they be, they must wear their Blue Robes from the
Beginning of the first Vespers, on the Eve of St. _George_’s Day, to
the second Vespers on the Morrow inclusive, _&c._

12. IF any Knight-Companion appears publickly without his dignifying
Garter, upon challenging the same, is to pay half a Mark to the Custos
and College.

13. AT the Times of Offering, each associated with the other who holds
the opposite Stall, are to march in Procession together to make their
Offerings; but alone, when his Consort is absent, and so that in all
Processions the Sovereign goes last.

14. IN the Morrow after the Solemnity of St. _George_’s Feast is over,
before their separating, a Mass _de Requie_ or Office _de Defunctis_
was to be used, at which the Knights-Companions were all entirely to be
present, without necessary Impediment shown to the Sovereign or Deputy
for Liberty to depart.

15. THEY were to leave their Robes at _Windsor_ always, to be ready for
them there upon any sudden Occasions that might evene.

16. JOURNYING near _Windsor_, in Honour of the Place, unless lawful
Cause obstructs, they must take it in their Way, and assuming the Habit
of the Order the Canons wore, devoutly to meet and conduct them into
the Chapel; where, if it happens to be time of Divine Service, they are
to hear the same; if not, they are to be detained no longer than while
the Canons shall say the Psalm _de profundis_ for the Defunct, and
during their own Offering: But if any had riden thro’ the Town, without
visiting the Chapel and offering there, for every Neglect he must go
one Mile on Foot from the said Chapel, to shew his Obedience, and offer
an Half-Penny in Honour of St. _George_.

17. UPON first Notice of the Death of any of the Order, the Sovereign
shall ordain a Thousand Masses, every Foreign Prince shall cause Eight
Hundred, a Prince of Wales Seven Hundred, a Duke Six Hundred, an Earl
Three Hundred, every Baron Two Hundred, and every Knight Batchellor One
Hundred Masses to be celebrated for the Good of the Soul departed;
which neglected for a Quarter of a Year after notice of such Death, the
Masses are to be doubled; upon half a Year’s Neglect, again doubled;
and so from Time to Time in like Form till the End of the Year, and
then the Year’s to be doubled.

18. UPON sure Notice of the Death of a Knight-Companion, the Sovereign,
or his Deputy, is to converse by Letters, the Remainder [not Strangers]
that are within the Kingdom, to meet him within Six Weeks in some
convenient Place, and elect another; which assembled, at least Six,
with the Sovereign or Deputy, every of them present is to name Nine of
the worthiest and sufficientest Knights without Reproof that he knows,
whether native Subjects or Foreigners, sobeit they hold no contrary
Party, or be against the Sovereign, _viz._ Three Earls, or of sublimer
Title; Three Barons, and Three Knights Batchellors, which Names the
Bishop of _Windsor_, for the Time being, was to write, or, in his
Absence, the Dean or Register, and, in their Absence, the oldest
Residencer in the College, and after shew them to the Sovereign, who is
to chuse out of them him that has the most Voices, and whom he esteems
the most beneficial to the Crown and Kingdom. Every Knight failing to
appear at an Election, without an approved Cause, was to pay to the
Custos and College the Penalty of a Mark, and at his next coming to the
Chapter shall kneel upon the Ground, in the midst of the Chapter,
before the Sovereign or Deputy, until Reconciliation.

19. SOON after Election, the Knight-Companion elect is to have a
Garter, in token of his Election, and that he is a Fellow of the Order;
and as soon as decreed to take Possession of his Stall, but not before,
is to have a Mantle, which, if he dies before he receiv’d, he was not
to be accounted as one of the Order, because he wanted Possession;
nevertheless he was to have one half of the Masses abovesaid, because
he had the Garter deliver’d to him and nothing beside. If he was not
installed within a Year after his receiving the Garter, and especially
if within the Realm, and without reasonable Excuse to be allowed of by
the Sovereign or Deputy, his Election became void, and they might
proceed to a new one: Moreover, neither the Sword nor Helmet was to be
put upon his Stall within the Castle, before his coming; to the End,
that if the Knight elect came not, his Atchievements might not be
unhandsomly taken down and abused, but honourably removed into the
Choir for the publick Use and Profit of the said College.

20. EVERY Foreigner elected was to have Certification of such his
Election from the Sovereign, at the Sovereign’s Charge, who was to send
him the Garter and the Mantle, and a Copy of the Statutes of the Order,
under the Common Seal of the said Order, within Four Months after the
Election, the better for him to advise on; which being accepted, of
whatsoever Condition he be, he was obliged within Eight Months after to
send a sufficient Proxy, according to his State and Dignity, a Knight
irreprehensible to be installed in his Room, and who was to bring with
him a Silk Mantle of the Blue Colour of the Order, also a Sword and
Helmet to remain at _Windsor_, which Mantle was be put upon the right
Shoulder of the Proxy, by the Sovereign or Deputy at the time of
Installment, when he is introduced to take the Stall in the Name of his
Lord and Master; neither was he to deposite the same till the End of
Divine Service; after which he was not to wear it, nor be admitted in
the Chapter-House, or have any Suffrage, by virtue of any Powers vested
in him; but this Favour Foreigners elected by Proxy were to have, that
could not personally come themselves, they were to be Partakers of the
whole Masses and Orisons of the Order; whereas, if they died before the
Installation, they were to have but a Moity of them.

21. UPON the Death of any Earl, [or of Superior Dignity] Baron, or
Knight Batchellor, his Successor, whether Earl, [or of Superior
Dignity] Baron, or Knight, was to have a vacant Stall of his
Predecessor, without any changing of Places, except the Prince of
_Wales_ alone, who was to have always the next Stall, and opposite to
the Sovereign; so that it may happen for a Knight to have an Earl’s
Place, or an Earl a Knight’s Place; and this because the first Founders
might be known.

22. EVERY Knight-Companion at his first Entrance, was to give a certain
Alms, according to their Eminence and Degree, for the perpetual
Maintenance of the Canons and Poor Knights, _viz._ the Sovereign Forty
Marks, a Foreign King Twenty Pounds, a Prince of _Wales_ Twenty Marks,
a Duke Ten Pounds, an Earl Ten Marks, a Baron a Hundred Shillings, and
a Knight Batchellor Five Marks, that by these pious Donations they
might justly entitle themselves to the Name and Privileges of the
Order; wherefore, before these Payments were rightly performed, their
Sword and Helmet [Atchievements] were not to be hung up, and for
Foreigners the Sovereign was obliged to pay himself.

23. UPON the Death of any of the Founders his Arms, in a Plate of
Metal, was to be fixed upon the Back of his Stall, and their Successors
were to have the like, but to be placed underneath their Predecessors,
and not to be so great as those of the first Founders.

24. AT Admission every Knight-Companion must promise and swear
personally, or by Proxy, faithfully to observe the Statutes of the
Order, and none are to be installed by Proxy but Foreigners only, which
cannot conveniently come in Person.

25. IF the Sovereign be out of _England_ at the Installation of any
Knight-Companion, or could not attend himself to do what appertains to
him in that Point, he might impower and authorize any of the Fellows to
officiate for him.

26. THAT there be a Common Seal or Signet Keeper, whom the Sovereign
was to assign.

27. EVERY Knight-Companion was to have a Copy of the Statutes under the
Seal of the Order, the Original sealed likewise with the said Seal, to
remain for evermore within the Treasury of the College, and upon the
Death of any Knight-Companion, his Executors were to send back such
Copy to be deliver’d to the Custos or Warden.

28. NO Knight-Companion was to go out of the Realm and Dominion of
_England_, without the Knowledge and Licence of the Sovereign, who of
Grace and Favour is bound to grant it upon a Military Expedition, or
other notable Act appertaining to the Honour of Knighthood, in
Preference and Advancement of this Order of St. _George_.

29. THEY were not to arm themselves against each other, but in the Wars
of their Sovereign Lord, in his right and just Quarrel; and if it
happen’d that any of the Order should be retain’d in the Cause and
Quarrel of any Lord, and the adverse Party desir’d another
Knight-Companion on his Side, that latter Knight is by no means to
agree but to excuse himself in all Things, because his Fellow was armed
on the other Side, and was retain’d before him. And every Knight was
bound to except and agree, at his being retain’d, that he may have his
Discharge from the Wars, upon any of the Order’s being engaged in Arms
before him for the contrary Party; and if the second retained knows not
of it, upon notice that any of his Fellows were retained before him,
and armed on the contrary Side, the second retained Knight was to
excuse himself to his Master, and relinquish the Quarrel.

30. ALL Licences given to the Knight-Companions to travel in quest of
Honour by Military Exploits; also all Certificates, mandatous Letters,
Certificates, and other Writings whatsoever relating to the Order, were
to be issued out by the Sovereign, under the Seal of the Order, to
remain in the keeping of one of the Order, during the Sovereign’s
Pleasure. And if the Keeper of the Seal absent himself upon reasonable
Cause, he was to leave the Seal with another of the Fellowship that the
Sovereign should appoint, to the Intent that the Seal at no time be out
of the Presence of the Sovereign, he being within his Dominion. And in
like manner concerning the Seal in the Absence of the Sovereign or the
Deputy.

31. IF any Knight-Companion for Devotion sake should desire to dwell at
_Windsor_, he was to maintain himself at his own, and not at the
College Charge.

32. ANY other Knight, not of the Order, upon the Account of Devotion,
that would reside there, was to be provided for at the Appointment of
the Sovereign, and the Fellowship also. Any Knight or other Person
giving 10 _l._ yearly Rents or Lands, or more, to the College, to
participate of their Prayers and Suffrages, he was to be registred in
the Calendar of Benefactors, and continually be pray’d for by the
Canons and Poor Knights.

33. UPON the Death of any Canon, the Custos or Warden is to certify the
same by Letters to the Sovereign, if beyond Sea, to know whom he
pleases to present to the Canonship.

34. THERE was to be a Register appointed by the Sovereign and
Fellowship, the most intelligent Person of the College, who was to be
present at the Chapters, to record their Elections and the Electors,
their Punishments, and Causes of them, with their Reconciliations, all
Acts whatsoever administred in their Council, from Chapter to Chapter
yearly; for the faithful Execution of which Office he was to be sworn
at his Admission therein; and whatsoever had been register’d was in the
Beginning of the following Chapter, on the Vigils of St. _George_, to
be publickly recited before the Sovereign and the whole Fellowship,
that what was amiss and incorrect might be mended and reduced to due
Form.


§ 2. BESIDES these Statutes there are Two other Bodies, or Exemplars
establish’d since, the one by King _Henry_ V. the other by King _Hen._
VIII. King _Henry_ V. finding the Glory of the Order declining, removed
the Grand Festival and other Solemnities, and commanded a strict
Observation of all the Founder’s Statutes, and brought many more to
like Perfection, which he subjoined to such of them, where they might
be properly and are as follow:

             { 3. THAT the Knights should mark their
             { Obeisance in the Choir first to the Altar,
             { and next to the Sovereign, or in his Absence
             { to his Stall.
             {
             { 8. THAT the Deputy should elect, if
             { the Sovereign (when abroad) had not Six
             { Knights with him.
             {
             { 9. THAT the Feast of St. _George_ should
             { not be kept upon St. _Mark_’s Day, nor the
             { Days of St. _Philip_ and _Jacob_, nor of the
             { Holy Cross, neither upon any Days which
             { should happen in the Festivals of the
             { Ascension or Pentecost, or other solemn
             { Feasts ordained by the Church to the interrupting
             { their Divine Service.
             {
             { 12. That when a Knight should ride
             { out he might wear a Blue Silk Ribbon instead
 To Article  { of his Garter.
             {
             { 14. That the Order and Manner of
             { Offering up the Atchievements should be
             { as is there prescribed, _viz._ before they
             { offer their Money, their Swords should be
             { first offered by Two Companions, which
             { the Sovereign or his Deputy should appoint,
             { and afterwards their Helmets with
             { their Crests, by Two others of the
             { Order.
             {
             { 20. That Knights absent in the Sovereign’s
             { Service might be install’d by Deputy.
             {
             { 31. That the Sovereign should take a
             { Signet of the Order abroad with him, to
             { be fixed to all the Acts he does in Foreign
             { Parts relating to this Order, in Distinction
             { to those done at home.
             {
             { 34. That no Charge should be admitted
             { upon the College by the Custos or Canons,
             { without the Sovereign’s Consent likewise.

THE Statutes with these Additions (as the Statutes of Institution) this
King caused to be translated into _French_, and transcribed into a
Roll, which was ordered to be presented to every Knight-Companion under
the common Seal of the Order. In after Times it was transcribed into
Books; and by a Decree, _Anno_ 3 _Hen._ VII. an Original Book of these
Statutes and Institutions, fair written, was to be reposed in the
College of St. _George_, and the Scribe or Register to have Transcripts
of them in Readiness, to present the elected Knights withal.

THE last and largest Body was first began, and received the finishing
Stroke by King _Hen._ VIII. chiefly in regard some of the former
Statutes wanted Explication and others Contraction. And for the
compleating of which Purpose, on St. _George_’s Day, _Anno_ 9 _Regni
sui_ he summoned all the Knights-Companions to convene next Year at the
Time of the Solemnity, about the Abrogation of what tended to darken
the Honour of this Order (if any such were), and for the Advancement of
what might promote the Grandeur and Lustre of it. But these Resolves
came to no Perfection till _May_ 28. _Anno_ 11 _Regni sui_, when he
entred upon this Reformation with all magnificent Ceremony imaginable,
for being accompanied with Nineteen Knights-Companions of the Order
proceeding in Cavalcade to the Chapter-House, and taking into
Consideration their former Statutes of Knights-Companions, with all due
Reverence implor’d the Sovereign to reform and explain them as he
should think convenient, which he brought to a successful Period, by
the Advice and Consent of the Society assembled: That done, all present
entreated the Sovereign, kneeling, that where any of them had been
peccant against the Order, he would please to remit, and issue out a
general Pardon, which he granted and ratify’d in Chapter next Day. This
was a Task of Three Years compleat before it rose to Perfection, _viz.
April_ 23. _Anno_ 14 _Hen._ VIII. for then the Sovereign, out of right
singular Love, well-temper’d Zeal, and entire Affection to this most
noble Order, to the Estate of Chivalry, and the Continuance and
Encrease thereof; as also at the humble Request and instant Importunity
of the then Knights-Companions, and by their Advice, Counsel and
Consent, did interpret and elucidate all the Obscurities, Doubts and
Ambiguities of the former Statutes and Ordinances. Divers Affairs
contain’d in Fifty of them being explain’d and amended; he made
likewise necessary Additions, the Original whereof being sign’d and
seal’d, were commanded to be carefully laid up in the Treasury of
_Windsor_ College, to remain as a Standard to succeeding Times; yet
they have not been seen there these many Years past.

THE Articles and Clauses added to the former Statutes, in this last
Body, are these:

             { 1. That the Interpretation of the
             { Statutes, _&c._ belongeth to the Sovereign.
             {
             { 2. The Three Points of Reproach declar’d,
             { and what is meant by a Gentleman
             { of Blood.
             {
             { 4. Of the Prerogative of the Feast.
             {
             { 5. How the Feast is to be observed by
             { absent Knights.
             {
             { 6. Attendance on the Sovereign, if
             { he be not at the Feast.
             {
             { 7. That the Sovereign’s Deputy may
             { correct Things in Chapter.
             {
             { 12. The offering up of Atchievements,
             { and a Taper arm’d with an Escutcheon.
             {
             { 13. Canons to sit in the lower Stalls,
             { when any Knights are present.
             {
             { 14. That Six Knights make a Chapter.
             {
 To Article  { 20. The Manner of Installation set
             { down.
             {
             { 21. Clause for a Foreign Knight’s
             { Deputy to be conducted from the Chapter-House
             { to the Stall; and for making
             { an Election void, if the Knight send not
             { his Proxy within Seven Months.
             {
             { 23. For advancing and translating of
             { Stalls.
             {
             { 25. Plates not to be larger than the
             { first Founders, except Strangers.
             {
             { 27. The Time Three Months prefix’d
             { for the Executor of a deceas’d Knight-Companion
             { to send back the Copy of the
             { Orders deliver’d to him at his Admission,
             { which might be also sent to one of the
             { principal Officers of the Order.
             {
             { 38. Concerning the Collar of the
             { Order.

THIS Body of Statutes was compil’d in _Latin_, and is recorded in the
_Black Book_ of the Order. It was translated into _French_ and
_English_ by Sir _Thomas Wriothesley_, Kt. then Garter King of Arms.
The _English_ Version annex’d here to this Treatise, is what hath since
been deliver’d (instead of the former Statutes) to all succeeding
Knights-Companions, according to the Injunction; but of late Times
appointed to be sent to Foreign Princes and other elect Knights abroad,
sealed with the Great Seal of the Order, affix’d to a Label of Blue
Silk and Gold.


§ 3. THERE have been several Endeavours since the Reign of King _Henry_
VIII. for reforming the Statutes. As first, King _Edward_ VI. who as
Sovereign, by the Orders themselves, had an undoubted Prerogative set
him to alter and reform many Things which seem’d inconsistent with the
Religion he establish’d. To which Purpose, at a Chapter at _Greenwich_,
held _April_ 23. in the Third Year of his Reign, the Lord _St. John_,
the Earl of _Arundel_, and Sir _William Paget_, were to peruse and make
them agreeable to the King’s other Proceedings, by the Assistance and
Advice of the Protector, the Duke of _Somerset_, and other Companions.
This was follow’d by a subsequent Order pass’d in the Chapter at
_Greenwich_ the Year after, that the Statutes should be reform’d and
corrected as they thought expedient: And for the better Accomplishment
of their Design, at the next Feast, _April_ 24. 5 _Edw._ VI. another
Order commenc’d, impowering the Duke of _Somerset_, the Marquess of
_Northampton_, the Earls of _Warwick_, _Arundel_, _Bedford_ and
_Wilts_, to peruse and amend the Statutes and other Books of the Order,
which were brought to some tolerable Degree of Perfection; for
thereupon a new Body was collected (in general very much altering the
Laws of the Order) and publish’d _March_ 17. _Anno_ 7 _Edw._ VI. But
this King within Four Months after expiring, Queen _Mary_, his Sister
and Successor, the very first Thing she transacted was to abrogate and
make them void; wherefore we need not mention them, as never in use and
unrevived. For the Execution of which Purpose, she conven’d a Chapter
at St. _James_’s, the 27th of _September_ following; and it was then
decreed, that the said Laws and Ordinances, as inconvenient,
impertinent, and tending to Novelty, should be disannulled, and no
Account to be made of them for the future; and for the quicker
Execution, Sir _William Petre_ (that Day admitted Chancellor) had
Orders to see them speedily expung’d out of the Book of Statutes, and
forthwith defac’d, lest any Memory of them should remain to Posterity;
and only those of her Father, _Hen._ VIII. and his Royal Predecessors,
should be retain’d.

IN this Affair King _Philip_, her Husband, appear’d no less zealous;
for on the 5th of _August_, 1 and 2 _Philip_ and _Mary_, (which was the
3d Day after he had been invested with the Habit) himself being present
at a Chapter at _Windsor_, it was ordain’d, That all Acts and Decrees
in the Great Book, [_i. e._ the _Black Book_ aforesaid] which were
repugnant and disagreeable, either with the ancient and receiv’d
Statutes of the Order, or else with the Laws of the Realm, should
clearly be abolish’d and erased, by the Marquis of _Winchester_, the
Earls of _Arundel_, _Pembroke_, and the Lord _Paget_.

NO sooner was Queen _Elizabeth_ fix’d on the Throne, but soon after,
_viz._ on St. _George_’s Day, in the second Year of her Reign, a View
of the Statutes was committed, by Commission, to Four of the
Knights-Companions, _viz_. the Marquis of _Northampton_, the Earls of
_Arundel_ and _Pembroke_, and the Lord _Howard_ of _Effingham_, who
were thereby impower’d to peruse and consider those Statutes with the
utmost Care and regard, if any of them were repugnant to the Religion,
Laws and Statutes of the Realm; and if any such were recorded, to
represent them faithfully to the Sovereign, that she, in Conjunction
with the Knights-Companions, might establish such Decrees concerning
them as she should think fit; but that any thing was done in pursuance
hereunto, doth not appear; for the Transcripts of her Father’s Body of
the Statutes, throughout the Time of her Reign, were presented to the
Knights-Companions at their Installations; and the Practice of her Time
was pursuant to the Direction therein, except in some few Things now
and then added or alter’d at future Chapters, when there arose fresh
Matters for such Expedients.

KING _James_ I. her Successor, revolv’d something towards a new
Regulation; and in order to put it in Execution, the 14th of _May_, in
the 9th Year of his Reign, decreed, That Commissionary Letters should
be granted to the Earls of _Nottingham_, _Worcester_, _Pembroke_ and
_Northampton_, to empower them to examine the Registers and other
Monuments which pertained to that Order; and where any Passage should
be found obsolete or obscure, to make it conspicuous and clear; where
Contrariety appear’d, fitly to reconcile it; yet with no Design of
innovating any Thing, but an Intention of renewing all, as near as
might be, to the first Standard and most ancient Institution of the
Order; saving always Power to himself, as Sovereign of the Order, to
add or diminish any Matter (according to the Occasion) as it should
seem agreeable to his Prudence for the Honour of this Most Noble Order.
What Progress they made in this Commission, the Memoirs of that Time
are silent in; but some few Years after, this Affair was reviv’d, and
another was issu’d forth, to the Earls of _Nottingham_, _Worcester_,
_Southampton_, _Arundel_ and _Montgomery_, and the Viscount _Lisle_,
all Knights-Companions, dated _April_ 26. in the 16th Year of his
Reign; which Six, or any Four of them, were thereby constituted to take
an exact Survey of all the ancient Statutes and Articles of the said
Order; and authoriz’d to call before them all such Persons, whether
Officers of the said Order, or others, as could give any Light or
Information concerning that Affair; and after a serious Deliberation,
to pen down what in them they conceiv’d meet to be explain’d, and what
to be added, whereby to render the Order more illustrious, that the
same being presented to the Sovereign and the Society, at a Chapter
holden, might be resolv’d on in part, or in all, to be put in
Execution, if it seem’d so good to that King.

THIS Affair mov’d very slowly; but towards the latter End of his Reign,
the Earls of _Worcester_, _Montgomery_, _Arundel_, _Surry_ and
_Leicester_, Five of the Six Commissioners above-nam’d, having held
divers Conferences, and debated several Matters represented to them,
and at a Chapter convened at _Whitehall_ the 19th of _May_, _Anno_ 20
_Jac._ I. did present to the Sovereign certain Articles, subscribed
with their Hands, which, for the Honour of the Order, they thought
requisite to be duly observ’d.

BY the first of which they made Provision for a further Progression
and Advancement of the illustrious Institution, in proposing, that
every Year a Commission from the Sovereign should be granted, or
continu’d to such Knights of the Order as the Chapter should pitch
on, to deliberate and weigh all Affairs that fell under the Order,
and that the Year after, an Estimate, by the Knights in Chapter,
should be exhibited, of their Resolutions and Proceedings by Virtue
of the said Commission. This, with Eight other Articles, were
confirm’d by the Sovereign and Twelve of the Knights-Companions, the
22d of _May_ following, in a Chapter held at _Whitehall_; and so
prosperously their Endeavours succeeded, that on the Feast-day of St.
_George_, at _Windsor_ in the ensuing Year, the Earl of _Worcester_,
(being then the Sovereign-Deputy) with Ten Knights-Companions more,
gave their assent to Eight other Articles (most of them concerning
the Alms-Knights) which the Morning after had the Approbation of the
Sovereign; and before the Celebration of Divine Service, by his
Deputy and Companions assembled in the Chapter-House, the Observation
thereof was duly decreed.

KING _Charles_ I. design’d and endeavour’d the most compleat and
absolute Reformation of any of his Predecessors; and at the Solemnity
of St. _George_, held at _Windsor_ the 6th of _October_, in the 6th
Year of his Reign, He commission’d Nine Knights-Companions, _viz._ the
Earls of _Mulgrave_, _Pembroke_, _Montgomery_, _Arundel_, _Surry_,
_Salisbury_, _Carlisle_, _Dorset_, _Holland_, _Berkshire_ and
_Suffolk_, with command to assemble Four Times in a Year, to take into
their Consideration the Affairs of the Order; all which, but the Earls
of _Mulgrave_ and _Dorset_, met at _Whitehall_ the 2d of _January_
following, where some few Matters fell under their Consultation. This
Commission was seconded by one of a larger extent about Three Months
after, and directed to the said Knights-Companions, or to any Eight,
Seven, Six, Five or Four of them, empowering them to meet and devise,
and exactly preponderate all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Order,
as well such as were established at the Foundation, as those that had
been since made, by Explanation or Addition, and to weigh advisedly
whether any Thing had been enacted, that had caused Doubt or Ambiguity,
or stood in need of any Change or Amendment; and if upon mature
Deliberation by them thus conven’d, there should appear any Contrariety
or Defect, for want of plain Expression, or other Omission, fit to be
supplied, tending to the Honour of the Order, That then the Sovereign
might, upon Return of their Proceedings, resolve upon some general
Declaration in Chapter, to reform and reduce into one Body all the
Statutes and Ordinances thereof, that the same being compil’d and
settled in one perfect Model, might be so consign’d to Posterity, free
from all future Questions and Doubts.

NEVERTHELESS not any thing was done upon this Commission, tho’ it stood
in force even from the 6th to the 13th Year of this King’s Reign; but
where the Neglect lay History does not fully inform us, tho’ it may be
conjectur’d by what follows.

AT the Feast of St. _George_, celebrated by Prorogation at
_White-hall_, for the Year 1636. upon the 17th, 18th, and 19th Days
of _April_, 1637. divers Petitions for Reformation, and reducing of
Matters to their pristine Constitution, were presented to the
Sovereign by the Chancellor, and read; some of which, more
especially, tending to set off and encrease the Honour of the Order,
were received and decreed by the Sovereign, and the rest referr’d to
the said Knights-Commissioners. The first of those Decrees which at
that time had its Sanction, was to revive and renew the Powers given
in the former Commission; and thereupon a new one, dated the 7th of
_May_ following, was issued under the Great Seal of the Order, and
directed to the Earls of _Mulgrave_, _Darby_, _Pembroke_, and
_Montgomery_, _Arundel_, and _Surry_, _Kelly_, _Salisbury_, _Dorset_,
_Holland_, _Barkshire_, _Suffolk_, _Lyndsey_, _Exeter_, Marquiss
_Hamilton_, Duke of _Lenox_, the Earls of _Darby_, _Moreton_, and
_Northumberland_, or to Three or more of them, to meet and consult of
any Matters contain’d in the Statutes, or for Honour of the Order.
These Knights-Commissioners were endow’d with all the plenary Powers
given in the foresaid Commission, dated 6 _Car._ I. unto which was
granted a further Addition, for the better effecting the Sovereign’s
Care: That Three or more of them should meet at the Sovereign’s
Court, and begin to put the said Commission in execution in _Whitson_
Week next ensuing, attended and assisted by the Chancellor of the
Order, and all, or any other Officers, or such of them as they should
fix on, or find serviceable. And being assembled, to have free
Liberty to hear, propound, and debate of whatsoever shall fall under
their Cognisance, or that they should conceive conducible to the
Honour and perfect Establishment of so Illustrious and Noble a Body.
And to prepare all Matters of such their Resolutions and Debates to
be laid before the Sovereign at the next Feast of St. _George_, and
so successively at every Chapter so appointed by him, to receive his
full Determination, Approbation, and Royal Assent, with further Power
to adjourn from time to time, after the first Opening and Reading of
the said Commission; their Meetings to be in such Places, and on such
Days as should seem most convenient to them.

NOW who wou’d suppose, that after so Noble an Intention of the
Sovereign, and his earnest Solicitude to issue forth a second
Commission, his hearty recommending and exciting their Deligence for a
speedy Dispatch, and lastly, his expecting an Account of their
Transactions the next Feast, these honourable Persons, Companions of
the Order, should need a Spur to accomplish so laudable a Design; but
it was so.

FOR altho’ the Commission was opened at _White-hall_ the 30th of May
following, in the Presence of the Earls of _Pembroke_ and _Montgomery_,
_Salisbury_, _Holland_, Marquiss of _Hamilton_, and Duke of _Lenox_,
Commissioners; yet Sir _Thomas Row_ Chancellor, in his Letter to Dr.
_Christopher Wren_, dated the 4th of _June_, 1637. sadly complained,
That it was much as he could do to draw together Five of the
Knights-Companions, to open and read the Commission, and this _quasi in
transitu_, was in Confusion and Hurry, and all that was transacted was
to appoint another Convention at Court in _Midsummer_ Week then next
ensuing, and charge the Chancellor to prepare Matter (for Propositions
and Observations upon the Statutes) fit for their Consultations against
that Appointment, according to the Tenor of the Commission. And in
another Place writes, That he found such Difficulty to procure
Meetings, and as certain _non Chalance_ in every one, as if it were but
a ceremonious Affair, and so few hearty in it, that he feared he and
the Officers should wait to little Purpose: And so indeed it fell out;
for albeit he attended in _Midsummer_ Week, according to their
Direction, yet there was nothing dispatch’d, save only the adjourning
of their Meeting to _London_.

SOME little Progress was afterwards made in this Affair at _White-hall_
the 8th of _February_ following, where Three of them were present,
_viz._ the Earls of _Berkshire_, _Lindsey_, and _Northumberland_, who
order’d the Chancellor, Register, and Garter, to prepare an
Abbreviation of the Statutes, and reduce every thing of one Head into
an Act, to keep up to Method, and avoid Confusion.

THE 1st of _February_ after, another Assembly of Seven of the
Knights-Commissioners was held at _White-hall_, in whose Presence a few
Points were debated; but little or nothing concluded.


§ 4. AS concerning the Annals of the Order, or the Books wherein the
several Resolutions and Decrees occasionally made in Chapters, and
wherein other historical and ceremonial Matters relating to it are
recorded, it will not be amiss to give some Account of them in this
Place.

THE first, in Order of time, is an old Paper Book written in _French_,
call’d _Registrum Chartaceum_, hitherto fortunately preserv’d in the
Paper Office at _White-hall_, which probably was begun by _John
Coningham_; for we find him, 1414. (a little before the Annals
commenced) made Canon of _Windsor_, and Register of the Order, and in
regard the same Hand-Writing is carry’d on from the Beginning of the
Book down to 16 _Hen._ VI. inclusive, where follows an _Hiatus_ till
_Anno_ 23 _Hen._ VI. that the Annals began to be set down with another
Hand; and that he shortly after died in 1445. Henceforward these Annals
are entred with promiscuous Hands, which may be presumed the proper
Hand-Writings of the Registers of this Noble Order, as they succeeded
each other in the Office.

AFTER we find _Richard Sidnor_ mention’d in the Register _Anno_ 16
_Hen._ VIII. (who subscribed his Name at the foot of every Leaf) the
Annals were pen’d in one Hand until _Anno_ 26 _Hen._ VIII. that _Robert
Aldrydge_, D. D. and one of the Canons of _Windsor_ succeeded him; and
then ’tis evident the Writing also was changed to an old set _Roman_
Hand, which ran on to the End of 29 _Hen._ VIII. in which Year he was
advanced to the Bishoprick of _Carlisle_; and this Book breaks off in
the 31st of his Reign.

BESIDES this there is another Book that goes by the Name of the _Black
Book_, wherein the Annals of the Order are transcribed in _Latin_,
concerning which there pass’d a Decree, _Anno_ 3 _Hen._ VII. that it
should be fairly copy’d out, and afterwards that the Sovereign should
be put in Remembrance of it; but neither of these Decrees was put in
execution, nor was this confirm’d till towards the End of the Reign of
King _Henry_ VIII. This Book differs very little from the _Registrum
Chartaceum_, for therein is nothing enrolled relating to the Order
(except one of the Exemplars of the Founders Statutes, and a Catalogue
of the first Twenty-five Knights-Companions) before the 4th Year of
King _Henry_ V. the Annals of the Order, until that time, being
entirely lost. It hath the same Hiatus or Intervals from 16 to 23
_Hen._ VI. from 7 to 10 of _Edw._ 4. from 4 to 7 _Hen._ VII. and from
10 to 14 _Hen._ 7. It also runs parallel therewith for the most part,
and that it was compil’d by Dr. _Aldrydge_, whilst he continu’d
Register, is collected from some Passages in the Preface of all the
Sovereigns, ending with King _Henry_ VIII. The Transcription of this
Book was finish’d _Anno_ 13 _Hen._ VIII. for so far is written, as also
the Appendix, with one and the same Hand; (in a middle-siz’d Text) but
_Anno_ 32 _Hen._ VIII. another Hand appears, which, with some
Variation, is continu’d to the End of 5 _Edw._ VI. where this Book
breaks off.

THE Register of the Order was oblig’d to provide Two Books, and therein
to enter the Ordinances, Statutes, and Acts of this Noble Corporation,
one to be lodg’d at the Chapter House at _Windsor_, and call’d, _Index
Windesoriensis_, and the other being a Duplicate of the former, to
remain in his own Custody, ready to expose to the View of the
Sovereign, whensoever he should demand it; this latter was called _Aulæ
Registrum_.

AS to the general Directions for Compiling these Books, and the
Particulars they are to consist of, we are inform’d from the said
Statutes and Constitutions; for besides the Entry of all the Scrutinies
taken in Chapter and Elections made thereupon, it is his Office to
record the Penalties inflicted on Knights-Companions, and the
Reconciliation of all Delinquents with other Acts, and their Causes
appertaining to the Order, all which are decreed to be recited before
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions at the Beginning of the Chapter
yearly, if Occasion be, to correct and reduce into Method. Moreover he
is to record all the Policies in War, Exploits, Transactions, and
memorable Atchievements, both of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions,
according as he can best attain the Knowledge of them, by his own
diligent Search, or the Assistance of Mr. Garter, which having
consign’d to Writing from Year to Year, is to be perused at the next
Chapter by the Knights-Companions, for their Approbation and
Correction; and being reiterated the second time in the Chapter, he is
to see that they be fairly engrossed in the said Book, for a perpetual
Remembrance.

AND because the time perfix’d for Rehearsal of these Particulars in
Chapter, had in succeeding Years been imploy’d in other Affairs. In one
of those Articles which the Knights-Companions exhibited to King _Jac._
I. the 19th of _May, Anno Jac._ R. 20. and ratified the 22d of _May_
following, it was decreed that nothing of this Nature, or any other Act
in Chapter, should be registred before it had been perus’d and pass’d
the Consideration of the then Knights-Companions, or at least Four of
them, who when they should set Times apart to consult of the Affairs of
this Order (for which they were chiefly commission’d) might then also
make Use of such Opportunities as should give this Business Dispatch
with more Conveniency. Upon mature Consideration had of those
Injunctions, the then Register at a Chapter held 19 _Nov._ 22 _Car._
II. presented the Continuation of the Annals of this Order, which he
had ranged in order to register in the _Liber Carolinus_, and submitted
them to the Approbation of the Knights-Companions, whom the Sovereign
had commission’d to inspect the Affairs of the Order; which Tender,
when they declin’d, he propos’d that it might pass the Examination of
the Prelate; but they not giving their Assent to it, in regard the
Register himself was under the Obligation of an Oath, to deal with the
utmost Fidelity in his Reports, it was decreed, That the said Annals
should be fairly recorded in the Book, without any further Inspection.

BESIDES the abovemention’d Particulars, there were Materials of another
Nature, decreed to be collected by the Chancellor of the Order and
Garter King of Arms, to be digested first, and after entred by the
Register; for whereas one part of the Chancellor’s Duty was to make a
Narration every Year in Chapter, at the Feast of St. _George_, of the
illustrious Exploits of the Knights-Companions, as well as the Actions
that tend to eclipse their Glory; so the Register was to note these,
and record them from a perpetual Æra or Memorial of their Honour or
Disgrace.

AND it is part of Garter’s Duty diligently to enquire after the
Valiant, Fortunate, and Renown’d Acts, both of the Sovereign and the
rest of the Knights-Companions, and relate them with all Exactness to
the Register, for his Engrossing: But how sparingly these are put in
execution, the Annals themselves bear witness. However, Sir _Edward
Walker_ Garter-King has drawn up an Account of the shining Actions and
Characters of the Knights-Companions, beginning with _Thomas_ Earl of
_Strafford_, and continuing it down to his Son, which he deliver’d Dr.
_Ryves_ the Register, for the Use afore-directed.

AMONG the Articles establish’d at the Feast of St. _George_, 21 _Jac._
I. the last is, That the then Register should compose a Book, wherein
should be orderly transcribed the Form and Manner of all the
Solemnities, Ceremonies, and Processions, at the Celebration of the
Order; as also of taking down and offering the defunct Knight’s
Atchievements, that the Knights-Companions might have free Recourse to
it; but such Book never was extant.

For the Safety and Preservation of the _Annals_, the
Knights-Commissioners determined the 22nd of _May, An. Jac._ I. 20.
That a secure and convenient Place within the Castle of _Windsor_
should be appointed, in which all Acts concerning the Order should be
reposed, and to which every Knight-Companion at all times might have
access. And upon the Remove or Decease of the Register of the Order,
the Book, containing the Account of all such Transactions, should be
committed to one of the Knights of the Order.

The second of these Books is called the _Blue Book_, so call’d, being
bound in Blue Velvet; it begins with the first Year of Queen _Mary_,
and ends at the 18th of King _Jac._ I.

The third being bound in Red Velvet, is denominated the _Red Book_; it
commences where the _Blue Book_ leaves off, and treats of the like Acts
and Entries, and is carry’d down to 14 _Car._ I: having first given a
full Account of the Installation of the Prince, afterwards King
_Charles_ II. And as to great part of this Work, it was perform’d by
the elegant and judicious Dr. _Matthew Wren_, Bishop of _Ely_, and
Register of the Order, whose excellent Pattern his Brother and
Successor Dr. _Christopher Wren_ hath copy’d in its following Tract.
This Bishop compiled a MS. _A. D._ 1631. wherein, by way of Comment
upon King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes, he hath compendiously shewn what
Alteration there hath passed in the Law of the Garter, a Work performed
with great Judgment, and exceedingly useful to the Curious.

The fourth and last Book is, _Liber Carolinus_, and commences 1640.
wherein the _Annals_ are brought down to the beginning of 1670. by
_Ryves_, then Register. And in a Chapter conven’d at _Windsor_ the 16th
of _April, Anno_ 13 _Car._ II. it was decreed, That there should be Two
of these Books compiled, the one printed in _Latin_, in the Custos of
the Register at _Windsor_; and the other in _English_, to be reserv’d
at _Whitehall_, and call’d, _Registrum Aulicum_.




                               CAP. VII.

               _The_ Habit _and_ Ensigns _of the Order_.


THE Habit and Ensigns of this most Noble Order are most eminently
distinguishable and magnificent, and consist of these Particulars,
_viz._ Garter, Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, George, and Collar; for as the
_Romans_ were very exact and particular in assigning each Degree a
peculiar Habit and Vesture, by which the Quality and Rank of their
Citizens might be discernable, the Distinction of Apparel was
afterwards taken up by divers other Nations, whence every Military, as
well as Ecclesiastick Order of Knighthood, did appropriate to it self a
peculiar Dress, Ensign, or Badge, as a Mark of Distinction one from
another, to set off the Lustre and Honour of their several Societies.

The four first, _viz._ the Garter, Mantle, Surcoat, and Hood, were
assigned the Knights Companions, by the Founder, and the George and
Collar by King _Henry_ VIII. and all these together are called the
whole Habit or Ensigns of the Order, which we shall treat of
succinctly, beginning with the Garter.

The Royal Garter challengeth the Preheminence, for from it this famous
Order receiv’d its Denomination: It is the first part of the Habit
presented to Foreign Princes and Absent Knights, and that wherewith
they, and all other elect Knights, are first adorn’d; and of so great
Honour and Grandeur, that by the bare Investiture with this Noble
Ensign, the Knights are esteem’d Companions of the greatest Military
Order in the World.

The Materials whereof it was compos’d at first, is an _Arcanum_; nor is
it described by any before _Polydore Virgil_, and he but in general: As
to the ornamental Part of it, it was adorn’d with Gold and precious
Stones, and had a Buckle of Gold at the End, to fasten it about the
Leg; but there’s no doubt but it was wrought with rich Embroidery, and
the Motto rais’d with Gold, Pearl, and sundry Sorts of Silk, as may be
guess’d from the Garters anciently plac’d on the left side of the
Knights-Companions Mantles, and those other little embroider’d Garters,
wherewith their Surcoats and Hoods were heretofore embellish’d.

[Illustration:

The present Habits, Ensigns and Badges, belonging to the Officers of
the Garter.

  _The Prelate & Chancellors Mantle._

  _Registers, Garters & Black Rods Mantle._

  _Garters Scepter._

  _Black Rod_

  _Chancellors Badge_

  _Garters Badge_

  _Black Rods Badge_
]

[Illustration:

 _Chancellors Badge_

 _Garters Badge_

 _Black Rods Badge_

 _The Garter_

 _The Sovereigns Mantle._

 _Hood._ _Surcoat._

 _The Collar and Great George_

 _Ribbond & George_

 _A Knight Companions Mantle._

 _Cap and Feather._
]

BUT of those wrought in the last Age, we have more particular
Satisfaction; for we find the Garter sent to _Emanuel_ Duke of _Savoy_,
_Anno_ 1 and 2 _Philip_ and _Mary_, was set with Letters of Goldsmith’s
Work, the Buckle and Pendant of the same, and on the Pendant a Ruby,
and a Pearl hanging at the End. The Garter made for _Francis_ II.
_Anno_ 6 _Elizabeth_, was richly wrought with Letters of Gold, set off
and garnish’d with Stones, the Buckle and Pendant weighing Three Ounces
and an half-quarter, was richly set with Rubies and Diamonds. The
_French_ King _Henry_ IV. had a Garter of Purple Velvet embroider’d
with Letters of Gold, and deck’d out with Diamonds and Rubies. And the
Garter of _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_, was embroider’d with Gold
and Pearls: But that Garter sent to _Gustavus Adolphus_ King of
_Sweden_, outvied all others conferr’d by former Sovereigns, each
Letter of the Motto being compos’d of small Diamonds; and for every
Stop, a Diamond within a Range of Diamonds, above and below, on the
sides of the Garter, and besides other Diamonds on the Buckle, and
about the same, to the Number in all of 411.

THE Garter which King _Charles_ I. wore upon his Leg at the Time of his
Martyrdom, had the Letters of the Motto compos’d likewise of Diamonds,
which amounted to the Number of 412. It came to the Hands of Captain
_Preston_ (one of the Usurper’s Captains) from whom the Trustees, for
Sale of the King’s Goods, receiv’d it, and sold it to _Ireton_,
sometimes Lord Mayor of _London_, for 205 _l._ But after the
Restoration, the King’s Attorney-General proceeding upon an Action of
_Trover_ and _Conversion_, Verdict was given for the King against him
for 205 _l._ and 10 _l._ costs of Suits, in _Trinity_ Term, 16 _Car._
II.

THE Motto of King _Charles_ II. was set with Diamonds upon Blue Velvet,
and the Borders wrought with fine Gold Wire; the Diamonds which framed
the Letters of the Motto, were Rose Diamonds, much of a Size or
Proportion; but those which framed the Stops, Table-Diamonds; the Total
which set each Letter, compos’d the Stops, Ilot Holes, and adorn’d the
Buckle; the Table was Two Hundred and Fifty; the Hinge of the Buckle
was pure Gold, and on it the Sovereign’s Picture to the Breast,
curiously cut in Flat-stitch, crown’d with a Laurel and the military
Garb of the first _Roman_ Emperors; the Table or Pendant was Gold, and
on the back-side thereof engrav’d St. _George_ on Horse-back
encountring the Dragon.

THIS noble Ensign, the Garter, was at the Erection of the Order
appointed to be wore on the left Leg, a little beneath the Knee, which
Usage still presides: And the placing it thus, on the Sepulchral
Portraictures of Knights-Companions, was an early Custom; for on the
Alabaster Monument of Sir _William Fitz-warin_, who was interr’d in the
North-side of the Chancel at _Wantage_ in _Com. Berks_, 35 _Edw._ III.
he lies there with his Surcoat of Arms upon his Breast, and the
Representation of a Garter (but without Motto) carv’d upon his left
Leg. In the same Posture lies Sir _Richard Pembridge_, elected a
Knight-Companion, _temp. Edw._ III. and is portraicted on his Monument
in the South-side of the Cathedral of _Hereford_, below the Pulpit, and
encompass’d with a Rail of Iron-Spikes.

THE next Monument whereon the Garter was depicted, was that erected for
Sir _Simon Burley_, (beheaded _A. D._ 1388.) and rear’d in the
North-Wall near the Choir of St. _Paul_’s, _London_. Thence-forward the
Practice became more frequent, and then the Motto began to be cut
thereon; insomuch that it is now the constant and just Practice to do
it, whensoever the Knights-Companions are exhibited in Effigies.

AND altho’ this Ensign was first design’d in Ornament to the left Leg,
yet it was not confin’d so solely thereto, but was anciently us’d to
incircle the Escutcheon of St. _George_’s Arms, worn by the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions on their Mantles, who within a small space after
us’d it to surround their own proper Coat of Arms, which their
Successors have retain’d as their peculiar Privilege, permitting it to
none but to their principal Officer, the Prelate of the Order.

THE first Example that occurs, is the before-mention’d of Sir _Francis
Burley_, where, on the Front, towards the Head, is his own Arms
empaling his first Wife’s, set within a Garter, (wanting the Impress;)
but another having the same Empalement, (plac’d below the Feet) is
surrounded with a Collar of SS. of the same Form with that about his
Neck.

THE Monument also of _Joan_, Wife of _Ralph Nevil_, Earl of
_Westmoreland_, on the South-side of the Choir, in the Cathedral of
_Lincoln_, bears the Arms of _Nevil_, empaling those of _Joan_, his
Wife, (who dy’d _A. D._ 1410.) Incircled within a Garter, and fix’d on
this Lady’s Monument, Daughter to _John_ of _Gaunt_, Duke of
_Lancaster_, is there such a Collar of SS. placed about a Square; but
the Paint being faded, was render’d unintelligible.

ANOTHER antique Instance is that Escutcheon, _Sable, Three Ostrich
Feathers Argent_, surrounded with the Garter, affix’d in the
Glass-Windows of _Greenwich_-Church in _Kent_, by _Humfrey_, Duke of
_Glocester_, and Supported with a Greyhound and an Antelope. It is
reported, these Three Feathers were the Ensign of King _Henry_ IV.
which were conferr’d by _John_ of _Gaunt_, his Father, who bore them
for his Device, and placed in a _Field Sable_, as here, but the Pens
were powder’d with _Ermin_, for a difference from the Black Prince’s
Feather, which were _Argent_, as the King’s Pen was _Or_, and the Duke
of _Somerset_’s Compony _Argent_ and _Azure_.

THE Arms of Sir _Lewis Robessart_, Lord _Bourchier_, Knight-Companion,
_temp. Hen._ V. we find encompass’d with a Garter on each side his
Monument, in _Westminster-Abbey_.

AT the Interment of _Richard_ Duke of _York_, Father to King _Edw._ IV.
at every Corner of the Majesty-Escutcheon (set over the Image of the
Defunct) was an Escutcheon of the Arms of _France_ and _England
quarterly_, and _Four Angels Gold_, holding the same within a Garter.
And so some of the Funeral Escutcheons of _John_ Viscount _Wells_, (who
dy’d 14 _Hen._ VII.) were surrounded with the Garter, as others bearing
his Lady’s Arms.

AT the Interment of _Thomas_ Duke of _Norfolk_, in _Thetford-Abbey_,
(who dy’d 16 _Hen._ VIII.) there was provided a Shield of his Arms
within a Garter, and a Coronet affix’d over it; a Target also of the
Arms of _George_, Earl of _Shrewsbury_, within a Garter, was born at
his Funural, _Anno_ 33 _Hen._ VIII.

IT was the Custom, (begun about the Reign of _Hen._ VII.) when the
Obsequies of any Foreign Prince were celebrated in _England_, to paint
an Escutcheon of such Prince’s Arms within the Collar of the Order,
whereof he was Sovereign or a Fellow-Companion; as those of the
_French_ King, _Charles_ VIII. celebrated at St. _Paul_’s, _London_,
had Escutcheons of the Arms of _France_, within the Collar of the Order
of St. _Michael_, at each End of the Hearse; and when the Obsequies of
_John_ King of _Portugal_ were solemniz’d at St. _Paul_’s, there was,
among others, one large Escutcheon of his Arms within the Collar of the
_Golden Fleece_. The Funeral Rites of the Emperor _Charles_ V. being
perform’d in _Westminster-Abbey_, 22 and 23 _Dec._ 1558. there were Ten
great Escutcheons compass’d with Garters, to shew he was a Fellow of
this Order: And upon the same Account, where Princes were Sovereigns of
one, and Companions of another Order, their Hearses were hung with
Escutcheons of their Arms, surrounded with the Collars or principal
Badges of both those Orders; as at the Interment of _Francis_ I. the
_French_ King, celebrated at St. _Paul_’s, _London_, 1 _Edw._ VI. the
Escutcheons were the Arms of _France_, encompass’d within the Garter of
St. _George_, and Collar of St. _Michael_. At the Obsequies of _Hen._
II. of _France_, _Anno_ 1 _Eliz._ at St. _Paul_’s also, there were some
Escutcheons of his Arms, incircled both with the Garter and Collar of
the _Golden Fleece_, having been a Knight-Companion of both these
Orders: Under the Joysts was a Majesty Escutcheon of Black Taffaty of
this King’s Arms, within a Garter crown’d with an Imperial Crown, and
in several Places of the Hearse were fasten’d other Escutcheons of his
Arms within this principal Ensign of the Garter.

KING _Hen._ VIII. was the first that introduc’d into his Great Seal the
Eschutcheon of his Arms incircled within a Garter, as may be seen
placed on either side his Portraiture sitting on his Royal Throne;
since him, all succeeding Sovereigns have born their Arms after that
Manner, not only in their great and Privy-Seals, but in those other
appertaining to their Courts of Justice, and generally in all Matters
where their Arms were visible (except Coins); in Imitation of whom, the
Knight-Companions have done the like.

BUT there were _An._ 21 _Car._ 1. certain Half Crowns stamp’d in the
West of _England_, containing the Sovereigns Arms, so encompassed,
regally crowned and supported; and this was the first Money whereon the
Royal Garter appeared. After him King _Charles_ II. having an Eye to
the Advancement of the Honour of this Order, caused the irradicated
Cross of St. _George_ encompass’d about with the Royal Garter to be
publickly stamp’d in the Center of his Silver Coin, struck upon the
Recoinage of it, _Anno_ 14. _Car._ 2.

THERE were other Medals heretofore stamp’d upon several Occasions,
wherein the Garter was designedly express’d, and enclosing Shields of
their Arms; as that in the Year 1619. _Frederick_ Prince _Palatine_ of
the _Rhine_, was crowned King of _Bohemia_, and _Robert Cecil_ Earl of
_Salisbury_ created Lord Treasurer, both Knights Companions of this
Noble Order: Moreover, Gold Rings have been cast into the Figures of
Garters; the Ground on the outside enamell’d with a deep Blue, through
which the golden Letters of the Motto appearing, set them off with an
admirable Beauty. And it seems such Rings were in vogue since the
Preface to the black Book of the Order makes mention of wearing the
Garter on the Leg and Shoulder, and sometimes likewise subjoins the
Thumb, _interdum Pollice gestare_; by which we may naturally
conjecture, that Gold Rings were formed into the Fashion of Garters,
and bestowed by some new installed Knights upon their Relations and
Friends to wear in Memorial of so great an Honour conferred upon them.

AMONG the Officers belonging to the Order the Prelate is permitted to
bear his proper Arms (impaled with those of his See) within the Garter,
and the rest only to wear the Badges of their Offices, surrounded with
the same to express their peculiar Relation.

BESIDES the Manner of bearing Arms, within the Garter of this Order,
the Garter either in whole or part, hath been by Way of Armory, but
without the Motto; as in the Seal belonging to the Office of Garter
King of Arms, where the Garter (enclosing a Crown) is placed on a
Chief, between a _Lyon_ of _England_ and a _Flower de Lys_ of _France_.
And to instance in Family, we find Argent Three _Demy-Garters Azure_,
buckled and garnished, _Or_, granted by King _Hen._ VII. to his Servant
_Peter Nerborne_, and sable a Garter, _Or_, between Three Buckles of
the Second, to be born by _Buckland_ or _Bowland in Com. Northampton_.


§. 2. THE second Ensign of the Order is the _Mantle_, which is the
Chief of those Vestments which the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
make use of upon all solemn Occasions relating to the Order. That this
Pattern was derived to us from the ancient _Greeks_ and _Romans_, is
not at all to be disputed, since it so little varies in Fashion from
their _Pallium_ or _Toga_; for the _Grecian_ Pallium was a sort of long
Cloak, which only wanted a Collar or Cape, and the _Roman Toga_ as
proper to them, as the _Pallium_ to the _Grecians_, and the Custom as
Antique as _Romulus_ himself; for he is recited by _Plutarch_ to have
worn it. The Pallium is more fully described to be a kind of upper Robe
that covered the whole Body, made fast on the right Shoulder with a
Fibula or Clasp. It was usually worn over the Tunica or short Coat,
whence the Proverb _Tunica Pallio propior_, and is more particularly
observed to have been a Garment fashioned without Sleeves, that reached
down to the Ancles.

IN describing this upper Robe, called the _Mantle_, (the Sovereigns
being distinguished from the Knights-Companions, only by a long Train)
we shall first set down its various Appellations it is mentioned by in
the Records of the Order; Secondly, the Materials whereof it consists;
Thirdly, the Colour; Fourthly, the Quantity; and last of all the
Ornamental Trimmings, that nothing be omitted to satisfy any curious
Enquirer.


                                 NAME.

IN the Founder’s Statutes it is called _Mantellum_, and in _Hen._ V.
_Manteau_, both which we render _Mantle_. But the Exemplar of the
Founder’s Statutes entred in the black Book, and the Statutes of King
_Henry_ VIII. call it _Trabea_, which _Rosinus_ reckons among the
different Kinds of _Mantles_ or _Gowns_. And in 20 _Art._ of King
_Hen._ VIIIth’s Statutes, it is applied both to the _Mantle_ and
_Surcoat_; sometime it is stiled _Chlamyda_; sometime _Stola_; but in
other Places more pertinently, _Pallium_ and _Toga_.


                               MATERIALS.

THAT Mantle prepared for the Founder against the first Feast of this
Order, appears to be fine Woollen Cloth, and it is not improbable this
Material was chosen, rather than any other richer, to the Intent the
Founder might give the Preference to our native Commodity, altho’
there’s permitted in the Statutes of Institution a permission for the
Proxies of Foreign Princes to bring over with them Mantles of Silk and
Velvet when they came to receive possession of their Principal Stalls,
either because other Countries were better stored with such Commodities
than our _English_ Cloth, or that it might be more agreeable to
represent the State and Grandeur of Foreign Princes, as accounting Silk
or Velvet the nobler Representation.

WHAT Duration the wearing Cloth had, is not directly set down, but the
first time we discover their Mantles to be of Velvet, is about the
beginning of the Reign of King _Hen._ VI. which Sort of Silk hath
thence remained until this Day. About this Period, ’tis observed, that
the Mantles of Foreign Princes were made here of Velvet, for so was
that transmitted to the King of _Portugal_, elected _Anno_ 1346.
Concerning the Mantles of the Knights-Companions, there is no doubt but
they were of the same Materials with those made for the Sovereign,
_viz._ at first of fine Woollen Cloth, and when the Sovereign exchanged
it for Velvet, they followed his Example; but we cannot meet with equal
Satisfaction in this Point, because the Knights-Companions provided
this Robe at their own Expence; and their private Accounts herein
passing thro’ so many Contingences, were of no great Durability. But
their Surcoats were of the Sovereigns Donation, and consequently the
Particulars of them remain on Record in the Rolls and Accounts of the
great Wardrobe.

THE Colour of these Mantles is appointed by the Statutes to be Blue,
and of this Colour was the Founders; by which, as by the Ground-work of
the Royal Garter, it is not improbable he alluded to the Colour of the
Field in the _French_ Arms, which a few Years before he began to
Quarter with those of _England_. But the Colour of the Surcoat was
changed every Year, as will appear by and by. Of the same Colour were
the Velvet Mantles, made _temp. Hen._ VI. who tho’ he altered the
Stuff, did not vary the Dye. It is apparent, that the blue Colour was
retained to King _Edw._ IVth’s Reign, for when this Sovereign
transmitted the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to _Julian de Medicis_,
the Mantle was of blue Velvet.

BUT in King _Hen._ VIIIth’s Statutes there’s no mention at all of the
Colour of this upper Robe, save only of the _Mantle_, which the Proxy
of a Foreign Prince was enjoined to bring with him when he came to
assume the Stall of his Principal; which, tho’ it does not come
directly up to the Point, yet it is to be observed to be of blue
Velvet. And it’s highly probable that the blue Colour remained still to
be used; for within a few Months after the compiling the said Statutes,
it’s plain, the Mantle sent to _James_ King of _Scotland_, was of blue
Velvet, and in the ancient Form of Admonition and Signification
appointed to be spoke at the Investiture of Foreign Princes, and then
in Plea it is called _the Mantle of celestial Colour_. Likewise the
Mantle sent to _Emanuel_ Duke of _Savoy_, 1 and 2 _Ph._ and _Mar._ was
of the same Composure.

IN Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign, upon what Ground History is silent, the
Colour of Foreign Prince’s Mantles was changed from Blue to Purple, for
of that Colour were the Mantles sent to the _French_ Kings, _Charles_
IX. _Anno._ 6 _Eliz._ and _Hen._ III. _Ann._ 27 _Eliz._ So also to the
Emperor _Maximilian_ 9 _Elizabeth_, to _Fredrick_ II. King of
_Denmark_, _An._ 24 _Eliz._ to _Joh. Casimire_ Count Palatine of the
_Rhine_, _Anno_ 21 _Eliz._ to _Christiern_ IV. King of _Denmark_, _An.
J. R._ IV. But that sent to _Frederick_ Duke of _Wirtemberg_ in the
same Year, was a mix’d Colour of Purple and Violet.

THUS the Purple Colour came in Request, and continued till about the 12
of King _Charles_ I. when he determining to restore the Colour of the
Mantle to the primitive Institution, gave Directions to Mr. _Peter
Richaut_, Merchant, to provide himself with a Quantity of rich blue
Velvets from _Genoa_; and upon their arrival into _England_, signify’d
his Pleasure by Sir _Thomas Rowe_ the Chancellor, That all
Knights-Companions should purchase as much of the said Velvet as would
furnish them with new Robes against St. _George_’s-Day next ensuing;
compliance to whose Will, all the Knights paid Obedience, at the Rate
of Thirty seven Shillings a Yard, being the Price the Sovereign paid to
Mr. _Richaut_ for the Velvet of his own Robes. And the first Essay of
these Mantles was to honour the Installation of the Prince, afterwards
King _Charles_ II.

AND because there were many Knights-elect to be installed after the
Restoration, it was ordained at the Chapter held at _Whitehall_ the
_14th_ of _Jan. Anno_ 12. _Car._ 2. (called to consider of the
Preparations of the grand Feast then at hand), That Directions should
be given to the Master of the Wardrobe to negotiate Abroad for
excellent Velvets of Skie Colour, and Crimson, and other Materials
agreeable for the Mantles and Surcoats, both of the old
Knights-Companions, and those that were then to be installed; which was
accordingly effected, and they were transmitted in time to accommodate
them at the said Feast.

THO’ the just Number of Ells of Cloth for the Sovereigns Mantle at the
first Institution are not set down, yet in the Total for his Mantle,
Hood, and Surcoat, there was allowed ten Ells of long Cloth. The Mantle
of King _Henry_ VI. took up one Piece, five Ells and three Quarters of
blue Velvet; and those sent to _Frederick_ II. and _Christian_ IV.
Kings of _Denmark_; and to the _French_ King, _Henry_ III. contained
each twenty Yards of Velvet.

THIS we find to be the Allowance for Foreign Princes, and are the more
full and extensive, by reason of their long Train, which being more
scanty in the Mantles of Knights-Subjects, eighteen Yards was
sufficient to make one of them. The full Length of King _Charles_ II.
from the Collar behind to the end of the Train, was three Yards the
Length of the foreside, one Yard and three Quarters from the Foot along
the bottom to the fixing on of the Train, was two Yards, and from
thence the Length or Compass of the Train, two Yards.

THE left Shoulder of each of these Mantles have from the Institution
been adorned with a large fair Garter, containing this Motto, _Honi
soit qui mal y pense_. These were distinguished from the lesser
Garters, anciently embroider’d upon the Surcoats and Hoods of the
Sovereigns and Knights-Companions, by the Name of _Garters Gross_.

WITHIN this Garter was the Arms of St. _George_, _viz._ Argent a _Cross
Gules_, and was heretofore wrought in Sattin, with Gold, Silver and
Silk; but in descending Times greater Expence and Magnificence became
the Practice of the Order, for it was embordered upon Velvet with
Damask, Gold, and sundry Sorts of Purls, Plates, _Venice_ Twists and
Silks, and the Letters of the Motto and Borders of the Garter composed
of fair Oriental Pearl. The Garter fix’d upon the Mantle of King
_Charles_ II. was encircled with large Oriental Pearl, so were the
Letters of the Motto and the Cross within the Garter, the Diameter of
which was seven Inches, but the Depth from the upper Part to the end of
the Pendant, ten Inches.

_Temp. Hen._ VI. it seems to have been the Mode to embellish the Mantle
with three or four Velts drawn down the sides, and round the bottom, as
it appears by the Monument of _John Talbot_ Earl of _Shrewsbury_ in the
South-wall of the Chancel of _Whitechurch in Com. Salop_.

ABOUT that Time the Lining of this Robe was white Damask, and
afterwards white Sattin; but of later Date it was lined with white
Taffaty, which continues yet in vogue.

FOR exemplary Ornament, the Mantle had fixed to its Collar a pair of
long Strings, anciently woven of blue Silk only (called _Cordons_,
Robe-strings or Laces); but of later Days, twisted round and made of
_Venice_ Gold and Silk of the Colour of the Robe, at each end of which
hung a great Knob or Button, wrought over and raised with a rich Caul
of Gold, and Tassels thereunto of like Silk and Gold.

AND at the Collar was usually fixed an Hook and Eye of Gold for its
firmer affixing of it to the Shoulders.


§. 3. THE Third Ensign of the Order is the _Surcoat_ or _Kirtle_, which
altho’ we find no Place for it in the Founder’s Statutes, is
nevertheless as ancient as the Mantle or upper Robe, that is only taken
Notice of there, for such a Vesture King _Edward_ III. then made,
together with his Mantle and a Hood to celebrate the first Feast of the
Order in.

ITS Original it owes to the _Greeks_ and _Romans_; amongst whom this
Garment had its determinated _Tunica_, and was worn next under the
_Toga_, but amongst them was both narrower and shorter; it was girt
close to the Body with a Girdle, and so fitted, that the Hem of it
reached a little below the Knee, or to the middle of the Ham. It was
the proper Mode of the _Roman_ Citizens, and by its trimming were the
three Degrees among them known; for the Senators Tunicks were
embroidered or purfled over with broad purple Studs, the Knights with
narrow ones, and the Plebeians plain.

IN setting forth the Surcoat, which was heretofore annually bestowed by
the Sovereign or the Knights-Companions, and therefore called his
_Livery_, we shall, as in the Description of the Mantle, treat somewhat
of the Name, Materials, Colour, Quantity and Garnishing of it.

AS to the Name in the old Rolls of the great Wardrobe, it is stiled
_Roba_, but more properly as the Founder’s first Surcoat is called
_Tunica_, which Name it bears in the red Book of the Order. In
_English_ it is rendred _Gown_, _Kirtle_, _Surcoat_, _Undercoat_ and
_Robe_. The Appellation of _Gown_ is attributed to _Surcoats_ of the
Sovereigns and Foreign Princes, _Temp. Hen._ VI. _Edw._ IV. and _Hen._
VII. But since, and very lately, it hath been bestowed also on the
Surcoats of Knights-Companions; and that of _Kirtle_ sometimes given to
those sent to Foreign Princes, as appears by the Books of Warrants in
the great Wardrobe, but the rest are Terms of a later Date: As the
first Mantles, so the first Surcoats were composed of Woollen Cloth,
and tho’ the Cloth of the Mantles was in some space after changed for
Velvet, yet the Surcoats continued afterwards to be of Cloth, at least
till after the Office of Chancellor of the Garter was erected by King
_Edward_ IV. as is manifest by the Precedent of this Livery in the
Sovereigns great Wardrobe; but in process of Time they became Velvet,
which sort of Silk is yet retained.

THE Colour of this Vesture was anciently changed every Year, commonly
into Blue, Scarlet, Sanguine in Grain, or White. But the Colour of the
Mantles remained the same as at the Institution, until Queen
_Elizabeth_’s Reign, and then it commenced Blue: And ’tis remarkable,
that the Surcoats of the Knights-Companions, were always of the same
Colour with the Sovereigns.

THE Founder’s first Surcoat was of the same Cloth and Colour with the
Mantle, _viz._ Blue, but in the 34th Year of his Reign he altered it to
Black, and of the same Colour were those he conferred that Year upon
these following Knights-Companions, _viz._ the Black Prince, the Earls
of _Ulster_, _Richmond_ and _Salisbury_, _Edmund_ of _Langly_, Sir
_Richard la Vach_, Sir _Hugh Wrotesly_, Sir _Reginald Cobham_, Sir
_Bartholomew Burghest_, the Lord _Mohun_, Sir _Walter Manney_, Sir
_Nele Loring_, Sir _Walter Paveley_, Sir _William Fitz Warin_, Sir
_Miles Stapleton_, the Earls of _Stafford_, _Warwick_ and _Suffolk_,
and Sir _Thomas Ughtred_: The Motive that induced him to pitch upon
this sable Colour, was conceived to be a kind of Humiliation, because
the Pestilence began again to spread its Malevolence, which had
furiously raged Eleven Years before. The Surcoats which the Sovereign
gave the Dukes of _Lancaster_ and _Clarence_, and Fourteen other
Knights, _Anno_ 37. _Edward_ III. were of Cloth, Sanguine in Grain.
Those Twenty four provided for the Feast of St. _George_, _Anno_ 7
_Richard_ II. were Violet in Grain, whereof one was for the Sovereign,
the other Twenty three for the Knights-Companions, following _John_
King of _Castile_, and _Leonard_ Duke of _Lancaster_, the Earls of
_Cambridge_, _Buckingham_, _Derby_, _Kent_, _Warwick_, _Stafford_,
_Salisbury_, _Northumberland_ and _Nottingham_, the Lords _Nevil_,
_Basset_, and _John Holland_, Sir _Guy Bryan_, Sir _William Beauchamp_,
Sir _Thomas Percy_, Sir _Nele Loring_, Sir _John Sulby_, Sir _Lodowick
Clifford_, Sir _Simon Burley_, Sir _Richard Burley_, Sir _Bryan
Stapleton_ and Sir _Soldan de la Trane_.

_Anno_ 11 _Richard_ II. there were ordered against St. _George_’s Feast
Twenty three Surcoats of white Cloth for the Sovereign, and Twenty two
Knights-Companions; and the 12 and 19 Year of the same King, the
Sovereign bestowed on the same Persons Surcoats of long blue Cloth,
after the Original Model. The Twenty two Surcoats made up for the Feast
of St. _George_, _Anno_ 1 _Henry_ V. were of white Cloth; _Anno_ ——
_Henry_ VI. the Sovereigns Gown or Surcoat was of Scarlet, as was that
sent to the King of _Portugal_ in the 13th Year of the same King.
_Anno_ —— _Henry_ VI. the Sovereign had white Cloth; and so were the
Surcoats given to Twenty Knights-Companions more in the —— Year of his
Reign. Afterwards the beforementioned Four Colours began to be disused,
for the Surcoat presented to _Julian de Medicis_, _temp. Edward_ IV.
was purple Velvet, and towards the latter end of the Reign of King
_Henry_ VIII. and since, it is upon Record, the Surcoats of the
Sovereign and all the Knights-Companions were Crimson Velvet, nor did
the Colour suffer a Mutation in the Surcoat, tho’ King _Charles_ I.
restored the Mantle to its first primitive Colour, _Anno_ 12 _Regni
sui_.

THERE has been some disproportion in the Quantity of the Cloth allowed
in the Provision against one and the same Feast, for _Anno_ 34 _Edward_
III. the Earls of _Stafford_, _Warwick_, and _Suffolk_, as also Sir
_Thomas Ughtred_ had then for each of their Surcoats six Ells of Cloth
(perhaps the tallness of their Stature required it) when the other
Fifteen Knights were allowed but five Ells, being the same Quantity the
Sovereign’s Surcoat had contained in it at the same time.

THE Dukes of _Holland_ and _Clarence_, _Anno_ 1 _Henry_ V. with the
Earls of _Arundel_, were allowed Eight Ells a-piece, the Dukes of
_Bedford_, _Gloucester_ and _York_, the Earls of _Westmorland_ and
_Warwick_, the Lords _Grey_, _Fitz Hugh_ and _Roos_, six Ells apiece;
the Earls of _Dorset_, with six Barons and five Knights Batchelors, but
five Ells apiece. Afterwards, when the Number of Ells of Cloth, Garters
and Furrs came to be ascertained for each Degree, all the
Knights-Companions (even the Prince of _Wales_) were not to exceed five
Ells: But since Velvet came in Plea, the Allowance for Surcoat and Hood
hath been eighteen Yards, when the Surcoat reached down to the Feet;
but now it being the Fashion to wear it shorter, the Allowance is
stinted to Ten. The Length of King _Charles_ II’s Surcoat was one Yard
and an half, and of the Sleeve one Yard wanting a Nail.

THE Ornamental Trimmings of these Garments are next worthy of Note,
especially at the Time of Instituting this Order, for they were then,
and a long time after, powdered all over with little Garters,
embroidered with Silk and Gold-Plate, in each of which was neatly
wrought the Motto, _Honi soit, &c._ Besides, the Buckles and Pendants
to those small Garters, were Silver gilt; of these Garters there were
no less than 160 upon the first Surcoat and Hood made for the Founder.

IN King _Richard_ II’s Reign, the little Garters that adorned the
Surcoats of the Sovereign, and the other Knights were wrought in
Embroidery upon blue Taffaty with Cyprus, and Soldat Gold and Silk of
divers Colours, and the Letters Gold. And as the Sovereign was not
limited in the Proportion of Cloth or Velvet for his Surcoat, no more
was he confined to the Number of Garters, wherewith to adorn it; nor do
I find that any of the Knights-Companions were, until the Precedent of
the Livery of the Garter was settled, for _Anno_ 1 _Henry_ V. the Dukes
of _Holland_ and _Clarence_, the Earl of _Arundel_, the Dukes of
_Bedford_ and _Gloucester_ had each of their Surcoats adorned with 120
Garters, but the Duke of _York_, and the rest wore but 100. The
Settlement in the Precedent of the Livery was, in relation to Degrees
of Honour, a greater or less Number of Garters: Thus,

  A Duke            120 }
  A Marquis         110 }
  An Earl           100 }
  A Viscount         90 } Garters.
  A Baron            80 }
  A Baronet          70 }
  A Knight-Batchelor 60 }

ABOUT the Reign of King _Henry_ VI. the Sovereigns Number of Garters
did not much exceed those which the Founder allow’d to himself at the
Institution; for the Surcoat and Hood of the said King consisted of
173; and the King of _Portugal_, _Anno_ 13 _Henry_ VI. 120 Garters. But
this Drapery of their Robes became at length quite obsolete, perhaps
when Cloth was altered to Velvet, and the plain Surcoat hath to this
Day continued in Use.

WHILE these Surcoats remained of Cloth, they were lined with Bellies of
pure Minever Fur, only the Sovereigns was purfled with Ermin; and of
these, it seems, a like Proportion was at first stated to all the
Knights-Companions, _viz._ 200 Bellies. Yet in the Reign of King
_Richard_ II. some Difference began in the Allowance to the
Knights-Companions, for a Baron, and all Degrees upward had 200
Bellies; but under a Baron 120 only. However, _Anno_ 1. _Henry_ V. the
Barons were tantamount to the Knights-Batchelors, for all Degrees above
a Baron were allow’d, a Fur of 200 Bellies. But the Barons and
Knights-Batchelors Furs were only 120 Bellies.

AFTERWARDS, by the Precedent of the Garter, there was another
Proportion limited, the Prince, a Duke, a Marquis, an Earl, had each of
them Five Timber of pure Minever allowed to a Surcoat; but the
Viscount, Baron, Baronet and Batchelor-Knights but Three Timber apiece.
In time these Furs were disused, and the Surcoats came to be lined with
white Sarcenet, to which, _temp. Eliz._ white Taffaty succeeded, and
that still continues.

WHAT became of the old Surcoats, since the Knights-Companions had new
ones every Year, the Black Book of the Order informs us, That on the
Eve of the Feast of St. _George_, the Knights wore to Vespers, the
Sovereigns Livery or Surcoats, used by them the preceding Year, which
after that Night they threw off, (for the new Surcoats were worn on the
Feast-Day); but the Ensigns and Ornaments of this Kind were disposed of
to the Use of the Colledge.

THE Hood and Cap comes in the next Place to be spoken of, which Hood in
King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes, and the Black Book of the Order is called
_Humerale_; but in the Rolls of the Great Wardrobe, _Capucium_. In the
_French_ it is _Chaperon_, a Word used in the Statute, _Anno_ 1.
_Richard_ II. _C._ 7. and also retained in the Old _English_ Copy of
_Henry_ VIII’s Statutes made of his Reign, and annexed to this
Treatise. They were anciently wore for Defence of the Head against the
Inclemencies of Weather, but of later Times Caps and Hats have supplied
their place. How they sat upon the Head, may be observed in the
Portraitures of the first Founders; as also with some Variety of
Fashion in succeeding Ages: Yet is not the Hood quite thrown by, since
’tis still kept reclining upon the Back, almost like a Pilgrim’s Hat.

THIS Hood was ordained, and is yet retained as part of the Habit of
this most Noble Order. And tho’ neither it nor the Surcoat is mentioned
in the Statutes of Institution, or in either its Exemplars, nor doth
King _Henry_ V. lay any Stress upon it, yet it is of equal Antiquity
with the rest, as appears from the Rolls of the great Wardrobe, and
_Henry_ VIII’s Statutes have made remarkable Observation of it, for the
Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and Collar are called the Habit of the Order:
And in the Black Book, _Anno_ 22. _Henry_ VII. at the Investiture of
_Philip_ King of _Castile_, the Mantle, Kirtle, Hood and Collar are
expresly called _Whole Habit_.

IT was heretofore, and now is generally made of the same Materials as
the Surcoat, and was anciently trimmed and set off with a small
Proportion of Garters lined with Cloth of a different Colour, and such
as would best strike the Sight; but now with Taffaty, as is the Lining
of the Surcoat.

AS to the Cap, which was instituted to succeed the Hood; it hath been,
and yet is, fashioned of black Velvet lin’d with Taffaty; but the
Figure hath several Times varied; for _Temp. Henry_ VIII. it was flat,
in Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign it was a little raised in the Head; but in
King _James_’s Time they were much more high-crown’d. This Cap hath
been usually adorn’d with Plumes of White Feathers, and Spriggs, and
bound about with a Band set thick with Diamonds; so was the Cap for the
Installation of King _Charles_ II. and sometimes the Brims have been
tack’d up with a large and costly Jewel.

THIS Custom of wearing Caps and Feathers at the Grand Solemnities of
the Order, had, for some Time, about the Beginning of King _James_ I.
Reign, been omitted, and thereupon, in a Chapter held the 13th of
_April_, _Anno_ 10. _Jac._ I. this commendable Custom was
re-establish’d.

TO these may be added the Cross of the Order encompass’d with a Garter,
which by the Sovereign was ordain’d the 27th of _April_, 2 _Car._ I. to
be worn upon the Left Side of the Cloaks, Coats, and riding Cassocks of
the Sovereigns and Knights-Companions, of the Prelate and Chancellor at
all Times, when they were not adorn’d with their Robes, and in all
Places and Assemblies (but not embellish’d with Pearls and Stones) that
the wearing thereof might be a sufficient Indication to the World, of
that Height of Honour they arriv’d to from the said most Noble Order,
instituted for Persons of the greatest Merit and Worth.

AND it was not long after e’er the Glory or Star, as it was usually
call’d, having certain Beams of Silver, that shot out in Form of a
Cross, was introduc’d and annex’d to it, in Imitation (as thought) of
the _French_, who after the same manner wore the chief Ensign of the
Order of the _Holy Ghost_, being the Representation of a Dove
irradiated with such like Beams.

AND whereas some Painters affirm the Symbol of the Holy Ghost to be
thus adorn’d congruous enough, yet censure it improper for a Garter,
let them consider that King _Edw._ IV. erected his White Rose with the
like Glory, whereof both the Stone Work and Wood Work of St. _George_’s
Chapel in _Windsor_, manifestly illustrate, whose Antiquity makes a
Precedent for it long before the Institution of the Order of the _Holy
Ghost_; but this King assum’d this Device upon appearance of three
Suns, which suddenly united together into one immediately, before his
successful Victory at _Mortimer_’s-_Cross_, a happy _Æra_ he thought
himself oblig’d to perpetuate. And they mistake who suppose it to be
the Garter that is thus irradiated, whereas it is something else more
worthy of the Glory, for from it, not the Garter, do the Rays diffuse,
_viz._ the inclos’d Cross of the Order, celebrated as glorious, since
it darted its bright Beams from Heaven, when it appear’d to
_Constantine the Great_; as the same is represented on a Silver Medal:
On the one Side whereof was a _Bust in profile_, or side Face of King
_Charles_ I. and on the Reverse, this Badge of the Order, within a
Garter, inscrib’d, _Honi_, &c. a Cross irradiated, dispersing its Beams
in a Rhombular Form of Eight Angles, beyond the Orbit or bounding Lines
of the said Garter, having for Circumscription, _Prisci decus Ordinis
Auctum_, 1629.


§ 5. HAVING finish’d our Discourse concerning the Robes of the Order,
we shall speak of the Robes and Hoods assign’d to the Queen,
Knights-Companions Wives, and other great Ladies, by the Donation of
the Sovereigns, set off and embellished with Minute Garters, and lin’d
with Rich Furs, which Robes they were adorn’d with during the Solemnity
of the Feast of St. _George_, a Custom almost as ancient as its
Institution. The first Mention we find recorded of the Feminine Habit
occurs, _Anno_ 7. _R._ II. when the Queen, the Sovereign’s Mother, the
Dutchess of _Lancaster_, the Countesses of _Cambridge_, _Buckingham_,
_Pembroke_, _Oxford_, and _Salisbury_, the Ladies _Philippa_ and
_Catherine_, Daughters to the Duke of _Lancaster_, and the Lady _Mohun_
had such kind of Robes and Hoods provided for them. They were made of
Cloth, Violet in Grain, like as the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
that Year, the Robes lin’d with Fur, but the Hoods with Scarlet, and
both embroidered over with little Garters, and the Proportion of Cloth,
Furs, and Garters, were stated according to their several Ranks and
Degrees; for the Queen had Eight Ells, and Half an Ell of Scarlet for
the Lining of her Hood. The Sovereign’s Mother had allow’d her one
whole Piece, and a double Proportion of Scarlet; but from the large
Quantity it is conceiv’d she had Two Robes and Hoods made at this time:
Besides, the particular Number are but Eleven Persons, and cannot else
reach the Total of the Robes that were made up and expressly set down
to be Twelve. The Dutchess of _Lancaster_ had the Allowance of Half a
Piece, and Half an Ell of Scarlet; the Countess of _Cambridge_ Seven
Ells of Cloth and Half an Ell of Scarlet, and the rest of the Ladies
the same Proportion of Cloth with the Knights-Companions, _i. e._ each
Five Ells a-piece, and Half an Ell of Scarlet. According to their Cloth
was also their Proportion of Minever; the Queen’s Allowance was Two
Furs, each containing Three Hundred Bellies of pure Minever; the
Sovereign’s Mother had twice that Proportion, the Dutchess of
_Lancaster_, and Countess of _Cambridge_ had the same Allowance as the
Queen; but all the rest of the Ladies had only one Fur of Two Hundred
Bellies. Besides the embroidered Garters to deck out the Twenty-four
Surcoats of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, and the Twelve Robes
for the Queen, and other Ladies, amounted to the Number of 2900.

AGAINST the Feast of St. _George_, _Anno._ 11. _R._ II. there were
prepared Fifteen Robes and Hoods for the Queen and other Ladies, of the
same Livery and suit with the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, _viz._
White long Cloth, and Blue Cloth for the Lining of their Hoods, bearing
the same Proportion in all Things as the former, _Anno_ 13. _Rich._ II.
the Ladies Robes and Hoods were Sanguine Cloth, and the Lining of their
Hoods Cloth in Grain. And in the 19th _Rich._ II. they were Blue Cloth,
and long Cloth in Grain for Lining their Hoods. In both these Years we
find the Dutchess of _Aquitaine_ had double the Proportion of Cloth
allow’d her (as had also the Dutchess of _York_) _viz._ Fourteen Ells,
(the Queen having then but the former Allowance of Eight Ells) and yet
her Proportion of Lining, both for the Robe and Hood, was no more than
allow’d the Queen.

BUT _Anno_ 1 _Henry_ V. the same Quantities of Cloth, Minevers, and
Garters, were the same to Ladies of all Degrees, and that was to each
Five Ells of White Woollen Cloth, only the Queen-Mother had Eight Ells
of White Cloth and Eight Ells of Black Cloth, a Fee containing Two
Hundred Bellies of Minever, and an Hundred embroidered Garters, and 12
_Henry_ VI. the Master of the great Wardrobe was commanded to make
ready the like Livery, both for Colour of Cloth, number of Ells,
Bellies of Minever, and Garters, for the Countess of _Suffolk_, against
the approaching Feast of St. _George_.

A plainer Narrative is made of these Liveries, _Anno_ 16 _Edw._ IV.
when at the Feast of St. _George_ at _Windesor_, the Queen, the Lady
_Elizabeth_, the King’s Daughter, and Dutchess of _Suffolk_, the King’s
Sister, had for their Livery Murrey Gowns embroidered with Garters.

BESIDES these Robes worn by the Ladies at the Festivals of the Order,
there seems to be some Imitation of wearing a Garter also on their Left
Arms, as the Knights did on their Left Leg, as it is observ’d on the
Countess of _Tankervile_’s Monument, where she is so pourtray’d.

AFTER a long Disuse of these Robes, _Anno_ 14 _Car._ I. there was an
endeavour to restore it; for the Deputy Chancellor sollicited the
Sovereign in Chapter, That the Ladies of the Knights-Companions might
be granted the Privilege to wear a Garter of the Order about their
Arms, and an upper Robe at Festival Times, according to ancient Usage,
upon which Motion the Sovereign gave Order that the Queen’s Pleasure
should be known herein, and the Affair left to the Ladies particular
Request, and the Year ensuing, upon the Deputy Chancellor’s Report at
another Chapter at _Windesor_, it was then left to a Chapter to be
called by the Knights-Companions, to preponderate of every
Circumstance, how it were fittest to be effected for the Honour and
Lustre of the Order; which was appointed to be held at _London_ about
_All-hollantide_ next; But the unhappy War breaking out, this Matter
entirely broke off.


§ 6. THERE remains now the Collar and _George_, brought in by King
_Henry_ VIII. And first, of Collars in general, which is an Ornament
not of late, but ancient Invention, and the wonderful Consent of most
Nations plead for it: Sacred Writ sets down the Collar of Gold for one
of the Ornaments _Pharaoh_ conferr’d upon _Joseph_. The Images of
_Isis_ and _Osiris_ were represented with such like Collars, in a
manner, extending to their Shoulders, as _Kircher_ informs us. Their
Workmanship seems wonderfully curious, being intersected with various
Lines, and divided with Tablets and precious Stones. The Collar was of
an illustrious Original among the _Romans_, and gave Denomination to
the Family of _Torquati_, descended from _L. Manlius_, whom the
Soldiers surnam’d _Torquatus_, because he fought with a Champion of the
_Gauls_, _Anno V. C._ 392. and, having foil’d him in fight, cut off his
Head, and then pluck’d off his Collar, bloody as it was, and put it
about his own Neck. In further Memory of which Action were found
several _Roman_ Coins referring to _L. Torquatus_, Consul with _L.
Cotta_, _Anno V. C._ 688. And it’s remarkable that when one of another
Tribe was adopted into this Family, he did also assume this Badge of
Honour, as in the Coin of _D. Junius Silanus_, tho’ the Fashion of the
Work somewhat differ’d from the former.

IN pristine Times none but Kings and Princes wore Collars, and
therefore their Use seems of Dignity and Power, as is evident from
_Daniel_, where the _Assyrian_ Kings used this Ornament. Afterwards Men
famous for Wisdom and Council, had them as a distinguishing Badge, as
in the Example of _Joseph_, and from the Proclamation of _Belshazzar_
King of _Babylon_, who proposed it as a Præmium to him that could
interpret the Hand-Writing upon the Wall. And Men famous for Military
Atchievements had it conferr’d upon them, in Recompence of their
Merits; thus Collars were of the Number of the _Dona & Præmia
Militaria_ among the _Romans_, and the Honour of receiving them thought
worthy to be consign’d to Posterity in Marble Inscriptions. From them
the later Emperors receiv’d it, and we read of investing a Knight of
the _Holy Sepulchre_ with a Collar at his Creation; where, as soon as
the Ceremony of his Ordination is over, the Padre Guardian Kisses the
new Made Knight, and puts about his Neck (according to the mode of the
Ancients) a Golden Collar, with a Cross hanging at it.

MOST aptly therefore have the Sovereigns of Military Orders annex’d
this Ornament of the Collar to their Habit, and conferr’d it on the
Fellows and Companions, many of whom have meritoriously deserv’d it for
their great Wisdom and valorous Exploits, and for this reason it was
instituted in additional Glory to the Ensigns of the Garter, compos’d
in a peculiar manner, in Relation to the Name and Title; to the wearing
of which the Sovereign oblig’d both himself and Knights-Companions, and
his and their Successors.

THIS Collar was ordain’d to be of Gold Thirty Ounces Troy weight, but
not to exceed it; howbeit that Collar sent to _Gustavus Adolphus_, King
of _Sweden_, weigh’d Thirty-four Ounces and a Quarter, and that of King
_Charles_ I. 35 Ounces and an Half; which, after his Sufferings, fell
into the Hands of _Thomas Harrison_, one of _Oliver_’s Major-Generals,
and was by him delivered to the Trustees for Sale of the King’s Goods:
They, 1649. sent it to the _Mint_, with divers of the _Regalia_, to set
the Stamp on work for the first Gold that the upstart Common-wealth
coin’d.

IT was appointed by King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes, that this Collar
should be compos’d of Pieces of Gold in Fashion of Garters, the Ground
enamelled Blue, and the Letters of the Motto Gold; in the midst of each
Garter, Two Roses plac’d, the innermost enamelled Red, and the
outermost White, contrarily in the next Garter, the innermost Rose
enamelled White, and the outermost Red, and so alternately; but of
later Times these Roses are wholly Red.

THE Number of these Garters are so many as be the ordain’d Number of
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions; at the Institution they were
Twenty-six, being fasten’d together with as many Knots of Gold, and
this Mode hitherto has continu’d invariable; nor ought the Collar to be
adorn’d or enrich’d with precious Stones, (as the _George_ may be) such
being prohibited by the Law of the Order.

AT the Middle of the Collar before pendant, at the Table of one of the
Garters in the Collar is to be fix’d the Image of St. _George_ arm’d
sitting on Horseback, who having thrown the Dragon on his Back
encounters him with a Tilting-Spear. This Jewel is not encompass’d with
a Garter or Row of Diamonds, as in the lesser _George_; but in round
Relief. It is allow’d to be beautified and sett off with Diamonds and
other Enrichments, at the Pleasure of the Knight-Companion who
possessed it, and upon that Score it hath been frequently adorn’d with
Variety of costly Work, whereon the Diamonds, and other precious
Stones, being set to that Advantage as might, upon its Motion and
Agitation, dart forth a resplendent Lustre.

BEFORE the Establishment of this Article by King _Henry_ VIII. it
appears that the Knights-Companions were invested with Collars at their
Installations, for the Black Book makes mention of a Collar among the
Ensigns of the Garter, wherewith _Philip_ King of _Castile_ was
invested, _Anno_ 22 _Henry_ VII. but whether a Collar of SS’s, or of
another Model, is not specifi’d: Nevertheless this Scruple is in part
clear’d up by an old Memorial of the Ceremonies, at the Creating
_Henry_ Lord _Stafford_ Earl of _Wiltshire_, 1 _Henry_ VIII. where it
is said in the Annals, that after he was invested with the Robes of his
State and Dignity, the Collar of the Garter was put about his Neck at
constituting him a Knight of the Order. And to make it more conspicuous
in a Vellum Book of the Statutes sent to _Maximilian_ the Emperor,
sign’d 1508. by the Register _T. Rowthale_, and in another of _Edward
Stanley_ Lord _Monteagle_, elected _ann._ 6. _Hen._ VIII. the Forty
First Article, enjoins a Collar to be worn by each Knight-Companion
expresly called the Collar of the Order, which tho’ it be not in all
Respects consentient to that prescribed by King _Henry_ VIII’s
Statutes, yet there is not much Variation, and ’tis reported to be a
_Gold Collar coupled together by several Pieces of Links, in Fashion of
Garters, with a Vermilion Rose, and the Image of St._ George _hung
thereat_. The Reason of the Knights-Companions wearing it at the Times
appointed, the License for putting it to mending, the Command not to
enrich the Collar, but the _George_ only; and under a Penalty not to
sell, pawn or alienate it upon any Necessity whatsoever, are wholly the
same as was afterwards enjoyn’d by King _Henry_ VIII. So that he did
but only annex to his Body of Statutes a Decree, which for the greatest
part had been put in practise before. In the 11th _Hen._ VIII. upon
Interpretation of the Eleventh Article of the Statutes, the Collar is
there enumerated as part of the entire Robes that a Knight-Companion is
oblig’d to wear, for a more convincing Proof, That the Collar of
Garters was used before King _Henry_ VIII’s Reign, the Monument of Sir
_Giles Daubeny_ plainly Delineates (who departed 22 _Henry_ VII.) in
_Westminster-Abbey_, where his Portraicture in the Robes of the Order
is adorned with such a Collar as King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes do
afterwards describe.

AS the Garter sent to _Gustavus Adolphus_ King of _Sweden_, so the
great _George_ (pendant at his Collar weighing Seven Ounces) was set
with large and resplendent Diamonds, to the Number of Eighty-Four.

IN what Regard this Noble Ensign of Honour the Collar, hath been with
the Sovereigns and Knights-Companions, not only of the Order of the
_Garter_, but other Military Orders, may be collected from the Pictures
of some of them, as well as from their Seals, Coins, and Medals, for in
these they have been pleased to exhibit their Effigies and Escutcheons
of Arms; and omitting Foreign Examples, the Collars, both of the
_Garter_ and _Thistle_, were express’d in the Coronation Medal of King
_Charles_ I. in _Scotland_, 1633. tho’ in that of his Coronation at
_Westminster_, and afterwards in that of King _Charles_ II. 1661. the
Collar of the Order of the _Garter_ are only put over their Royal Robes.

THESE Ornaments of the Collars, have been affix’d sometimes encircling
the Shields of their Arms; and in a Seal of _Charles the Bold_ Duke of
_Burgundy_, Sovereign of the Order of the _Golden Fleece_, plac’d to an
Instrument dated, 1470. it is worthy of Remark, that Collar adorns the
Neck of the Lyon of _Flanders_; but the Sovereigns of the _Garter_
usually encompass’d their Arms, not within the Collar of the Order, but
the Royal Garter, that being its principal Ensign; and sometimes,
having no Shield of Arms, the void Space within the Garter, exhibits
their Arms.

OBSERVABLE is the Seal of _Charles_ Count _Palatine_ of the _Rhine_,
wherein is a Shield quarterly of the _Palatinate_ and _Bavaria_,
obscuring the Lyon Guardant its Supporter, his Four SS’s only appearing
quadrangularly, and his Head a top ensign’d with an Electoral Crown;
this Shield is encircled both within the Garter and Collar of the
Order, and is the first Example wherein both these Ensigns are jointly
together. It is very frequent to express the Collars of different
Orders together: Thus I have seen the Arms of _Robert Dudley_ Earl of
_Leicester_, entour’d within the Garter, and a Collar of the Order of
St. _Michael_, having been Knight of these Orders, and the Funeral
Atchievement of the late _James Hamilton Douglas_ Duke of _Hamilton_,
had the Garter and a Collar of the Thistle about it. And in a Plate
under the Effigies of the Duke of _Aspernons_, a Shield of his Arms
quarter’d, is encompass’d with the chiefest Ensigns of those Three
Orders, whereof he was a Brother and Companion, _viz._ with the Garter
and the Collars of St. _Michael_ and the _Holy Ghost_. And the older
the Order is in the Roll of Antiquity, whose chief Ensign is there
represented, the nearer ought it to be plac’d to the Escutcheon of
Arms, being the more Honourable Post. A Mistake was committed in the
marshalling these Collars, when the Duke of _Chevereux_ affixed it over
his Stall at _Windsor_, the Collars of St. _Mithael_ and the _Holy
Ghost_ are plac’d nearer to his Escutcheon than that of the Garter.

§ 8. AND whereas we have spoke of another kind of Collar, call’d a
Collar of SS’s, worn as Badges of lower and inferior Honour, it will
not be amiss to inform our Judgment in other Affairs concerning them.
_Wicelius_ informs us from a Book in the Library of _Fulda_, where (in
the Life of the Two Brothers _Simplicius_ and _Faustinus_, both
Senators, and suffer’d Martyrdom under _Dioclesian_) there is a
Description of the Society of St. _Simplicius_, consisting of Noble
Personages in their own Families, and describing the Collar wore as the
Badge of it says, thus: _It was the Custom of those Persons to wear
about their Necks Silver Collars, compos’d of double SS’s, which denote
the Name of Saint_ Simplicius, _between these double SS’s. The Collar
consisted of Twelve small Plates of Silver, in which were engraven the
Twelve Articles of the Creed, together with a single Trefoil: The Image
of St._ Simplicius _hung at the Collar, and from it Seven Plates,
representing the Seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost. As to the manner of
their Martyrdom, they were bound together by the Neck to a Stone, and
thrown over the Bridge into the River_ Tyber.

AT what Time the Collar of SS’_s_ came into _England_ is not fully
determin’d, but it will appear at least Three Hundred Years since, and
worn as an Ornament for Women, as well as Men; for on a Monument in the
Collegiate Church of _Warwick_, the Figure of _Margaret_, Wife to Sir
_William Peito_ (said to be interr’d _Temp. Edw._ III.) hath a Collar
of SS’_s_ drawn about, and set close to her Neck, which the Sculpture
in _The Antiquities of_ Warwickshire, by mistake, represented like a
Ruff. There was also a Collar of SS’_s_ about the Neck of Sir _Simon
Burley_’s Statue in St. _Paul_’s _London_.

IN the ancient Creation of an Esquire in _England_, part of the
Ceremony was the King’s putting about his Neck a Silver Collar of
SS’_s_. And _Selden_, in his Titles of Honour contemns not the old
Ballad, _The Tanner of_ Tamworth, to prove the Creation of Esquires in
King _Edw._ IV’s Reign, by conferring such Collars on them. But that
the Golden one was the undoubted Badge of a Knight, as may be instanc’d
by many undeniable Examples, deduc’d from the Monuments of such
Persons, _Temp. Hen._ VI. _Ed._ IV. _Hen._ VII. _Hen._ VIII. and since,
and so legally appropriate thereto, that in the Act 24 _H._ VIII. made
for Reformation of Apparel, there is a Proviso entred, That Knights,
notwithstanding, might publickly wear a Gold Collar of SS’_s_, tho’
since it is grown obsolete and useless. _Favin_ tells us that our
_Hen._ V. instituted an Order surnam’d Knights of the SS’_s_ on the Day
of the Martyrs St. _Crispine_ and _Crispianus_; which tho’ he found
nothing of it in our _English_ Historians, yet from the Chronicle of
_Juvenal des Ursins_, where he treats of the Battle of _Agincourt_, he
collected this following Relation.

“THE King of _England_ exhorted his Men, and commanded, That if any had
trespass’d against another, they should be reconcil’d and confess’d to
the Priests, otherwise no good Success wou’d accrew to them in their
Attempts. He advis’d them to be civil in their March, and to do their
Duty well, and agreed upon these Conditions, That those of their
Company who were not of gentle Extraction he wou’d make so from the
Fountain of Honour, and give them Warrants, that for the future they
should enjoy the Privileges the Gentlemen of _England_ had; and to the
End they might be distinguish’d from others, he granted them leave to
wear a Collar powder’d with the Letter S.”

AMONG the Variety of Collars of SS’s now in vogue, there are these
following: The Lord Mayor of _London_’s Collar is compos’d of Gold,
having a Knot (like one of those that tye the Garters together in the
great Collar of the Order) inserted between Two SS_s_, and they again
situated between Two Roses, _viz._ a White Rose within a Red, and in
the Middle before the Breast is a large Portcullis, whereat hangs a
most rich Jewel sett with large Diamonds.

THE Collars of the Lords Chief Justices of both the Benches, and the
chief Baron of the _Exchequer_, are (in Memory of the said St.
_Simplicius_, a Senator, and consequently a Gownman) form’d of the
Letter S, and a Knot alternately, having a Rose set in that part of it
which falls out to be in the Middle of their Breasts, and another on
their Backs; the Five Flowers of these Roses are constituted of Five
large Pearls.

THOSE Collars, which appertain to the Kings and Heralds of Arms, as
well as to Serjeants at Arms, having been bestow’d by former Kings, and
renew’d to them by King _Charles_ II. to be worn upon Days of solemn
Attendance, are compos’d of SS’s link’d together. In the Middle of the
Breast is a Rose, at each of which hangs Three small Drops of Silver;
but the SS’s in the Collars worn by the Kings of Arms are made somewhat
larger than the other, and in that part lying on either Shoulder, is a
Portcullis taken in between the SS’s, which are wanting in the rest.

THE general difference of the Collars appropriate to the before-named
Degrees, is this; Knights have allow’d them Collars of Silver gilt, but
Esquires only Silver; and therefore in the Creating of an Herald, in
part of that Ceremony, he is made an Esquire, by putting on him a
Collar of SS’s of Silver; and so is a Serjeant at Arms.

THE Kings of _England_ have sometimes been pictured with a Collar of
SS’s about their Arms, in like manner as the Garter doth surround them,
as appears from an Impression of King _Henry_ VIII’s Privy Signet;
whereon his Royal Arms crown’d are encircled with a Collar of SS’s, to
the lower End of which are affix’d Two Portcullisses.


§ 9. WE come now to the lesser _George_ of the Order; and we do not
find that the Effigies of St. _George_ was at any time worn by the
Sovereign or Knights-Companions, before the Breast or under the Arm, as
now used till the 13th of _Henry_ VIII. But then that King decreed in a
Chapter held at _Greenwich_, the Morrow after St. _George_’s Day, That
every Knight should wear loosely before his Breast the Image of St.
_George_ in a Gold Chain, or otherwise, in a Ribband, the same to be
fasten’d within the ennobled Garter, for a manifest Distinction between
the Knights-Companions, and others of the Nobility and Knights, who,
according to the Mode of those Times, wore large Gold Chains, the
ordinary Ensigns of Knighthood. And thus the wearing the Medal or
Jewel, usually call’d the lesser _George_, to distinguish it from the
other Work at the Collar of the Order, first receiv’d the Injunction,
and hath since been frequently used.

THIS _George_ was, for the most part, pure Gold curiously wrought, but
divers of them were exquisitely graved in Onyx’s and Agats, and with
such a happy Collection of the Stones, that heightned and received
their Beauty by the Skill of the Artificer, in contriving the Figures
and History, the natural Tincture of the Stones have so fitted them
with Colours for Flesh, Hair, and every thing else, even to Surprize
and Admiration. In this Jewel is St. _George_ represented in a Riding
Posture encountring the Dragon with his drawn Sword.

BY the last Article of King _Henry_ VIII’s. Statutes, it was allowed to
be enriched at the Pleasure of the Possessor, (as is the great George)
which for the most Part hath been curiously enamell’d, and the Garter
about it sett with Diamonds. And of what weight and bigness these
lesser _George_’s were, may be gather’d from that sent to the French
King _Charles_ IX. being an Ounce and an half and half quarter Weight.
The Variety of Workmanship in those Gold Chains whereat this Jewel
hung, was usually great, according to the Fancy and Pleasure of the
Persons for whom they were wrought. But within a short Space, wearing
the lesser George in Silk-Ribbands, as well as Gold-Chains, was
promiscuously us’d and _ad Libitum_. (So were the Symbols of Foreign
Orders, as divers Coins and Medals declare.) But the Colour of these
Ribbands when they came first to be wore, was black. _John Dudley_
Viscount _Lisle_, the Lords St. _John_ and _Parr_, so used them at
their Investiture, 35 _Henry_ VIII. and several Pictures of other
Knights-Companions about that time confirm the same. That small Chain
whereat hung the lesser _George_ transmitted to _Emanuel_ of _Savoy_,
_Ann._ 1 & 2 _Ph._ & _Mar._ was formed of twelve Pieces of Gold, in
every of which was sett three small Diamonds, and of twelve other like
Pieces, wherein were three Rubies and twenty four Pearls.

IT appears by a Letter of Sir _Richard_ St. _George_, Kt.
_Clarencieux_, dated _July_ 10th, 1627. that the blue Ribband had some
Years before been additional to the Ornament of the Order; and ’tis
reported, that _Robert_ Earl of _Essex_ observing in _France_ the
Jewels of the Order of St. _Michael_ and St. _Esprit_ worn in blue
Ribbands, upon his return was the principal motive those Ribbands
whereat the _George_ hung, were exchanged into that Colour. And in a
Picture of Queen _Elizabeth_, drawn towards the Declension of her
Reign, her lesser George is represented hanging before her Breast in a
blue Ribband. And this Colour was more caressed, and grew in great
repute, by reason it was the Ground of the Garter, and nearest the
Colour of the Mantle of the Order: So that toward the latter End of the
Reign of King _James_ I. because the dye of the Ribband had not been
peculiarly express’d in any Statute, and the blue and azure accustomed
for some Years past, it was decreed, That for the future it should be
always of blue, and no other; nor in time of Mourning it self, should
be changed.

THE Manner of wearing this Ribband in time of Peace, was of later Times
pendant about the Neck, down to the Middle of the Breast, where the
lesser George hung; but since, for the more Conveniency of Riding or
Action, the same is spread over the left Shoulder, and brought under
the right Arm where the Jewel hangs.

BUT where the Pictures of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions are
drawn in Armour, there even to this Day the George is represented as
fix’d to a Gold Chain instead of a blue Ribband, and worn about the
Neck, not brought under the right Arm, as exhibited on the three Pound
Pieces of Gold stamped at _Oxford_ by King _Charles_ I. 1643. and a
Medal of _Charles_ Count Palatine of the _Rhine_, dated 1645.

AMONG the invaluable Jewels and other Curiosities of King _Charles_ I.
which came to the Hands of the Trustees appointed for Sale of his
Goods, were these,

                                            _l. s. d._

 A George containing 161 Diamonds, Sold for 71  2  0

 A George cut in Onyx, with 41 Diamonds  }
   in the Garnish,                       }  37  0  0

 A small George with a few Diamonds          9  0  0

 A George with 5 Rubies and 3 Diamonds,  }
   and 11 Diamonds in a Box              }  11  0  0

 A George cut in a Garnet                    8  0  0
                                             -------
                                       Total 136 2 0
                                             -------

THE George King _Charles_ I. had at his Martyrdom, was curiously
Engraved in an Onyx set about with twenty One large Table-Diamonds in
the Fashion of a Garter. On the reverse of the said George was the
Picture of the Queen set in a Case of Gold, the Lid neatly enamell’d
with Goldsmith’s Work, and surrounded with another Garter adorned with
an equal Number of Diamonds, as was that of King _Charles_ II. also
sett with fair Diamonds; and after the Defeat given to the _Scotch_
Forces at _Worcester_, 4 _Car._ II. was strangely preserved by Colonel
_Blague_, one of that King’s dispersed Attendants, who resigned it for
safety to the Wife of Mr. _Barlow_ of _Blare-Pipe-House_ in
_Stafford-shire_, where he took Sanctuary; from whom _Robert Milward_
Esq; receiv’d and gave it into the Hands of Mr. _Isaac Walton_, (all
Loyalists.) It came again to _Blague_’s Possession, then Prisoner in
the Tower; whence making his escape, he restor’d it to King _Charles_
II.

IT is worthy of Remark, that besides the Sovereign of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, other Princes of Christendom have assumed the
bearing St. _George_ encountring the Dragon in like Posture, tho’ not
so anciently, nor upon the same Grounds and Foundation as they;
probably having elected him Patron and Guardian of their Countries or
Families; such as the Emperors of _Russia_, the Dukes of _Mantua_, and
the Counts _Mansfield_ in _Germany_, as their Seals and Coins plainly
demonstrate.

IN the Great Seal of _Borice Feodorwicke_, Emperour of _Russia_ affixed
to his Letter sent to Queen _Elizabeth_, dated at _Mosco_, _June_ 12th,
1602, was a double Headed Eagle displaid, having each Head crowned, and
bearing an Eschutcheon with the Representation of St. _George_ upon its
Breast. There is another of this Emperour’s Great Seals, fixed to his
Letter, dated _May_ 31st. 1594. which he also sent to Queen
_Elizabeth_. On one side is the above-said Eagle, having on his Breast
an Escutcheon charged with an Horse currant; the Reverse the Figure of
St. _George_ encountring the Dragon with his Spear. The Great Seal of
_Alexie Michaelowich_, Emperour of _Russia_, affixed to his Letters
sent King _Charles_ II. 1660. hath a like Eagle with a third Crown
situated between the two Heads, and bearing in a Cartouch-Compartment
upon his Breast, the Figure of St. _George_: Which Representation of
St. _George_ and the Dragon, we find assigned for Arms, to _Anne de
Russie_, Daughter to _Jarislaus_ King of _Russia_ and _Muscovia_, given
in Espousal to _Henry_ I. King of _France_, 1051. and thus Blazon’d,
_D’in St._ Marthe _de Gueules, a un homme a Cheval, d’argent, tenant
une Lance en la main, qu’il darde en la gueule d’un Dragon renverse_.

THE Counts of _Mansfield_ have frequently stamp’d it on their Coin. On
one side is St. _George_ encountring the Dragon with his Sword, with
this Circumscription, _Sanct. Geo. Co. do. de Man._ on the reverse, his
Arms circumscribed, _Mon. de Arc. Co. do. de Man._ Of those of the
Dukes of _Mantua_, we may see one of _Vincentius_ Duke of _Mantua_ and
_Montferat_, a Knight of the Order of the _Golden Fleece_, wherein is
his Effigies to the Breast, _Vinc. D. G. Dux MANT._ III. _MONTFERU._ on
the Reverse St. _George_ and the Dragon, Motto, _Protector nostra
aspic._ 1591. and _Casal_ at the Bottom.


§ 10. _When the Habit or part of it ought to be worn is the next thing
we shall speak of._

THE more solemn Days and Occasions which require a fuller conformity,
and the wearing the whole Habit, _i. e._ the Garter, Mantle, Surcoat,
Hood, Collar, Great George, and Cap, are first, The High Festival of
the Order, commonly called St. _George_’s Feast, whether it be
solemnized on the 22d, 23d or 24th of _April_, annually, or any other
Days within the Year by Prorogation, as is apparent by all the Bodies
of the Statutes.

FOR, First it is ordained, That the Knights-Companions should be
Arrayed in the whole Habit on the Eve of St. _George_, before the
Sovereign proceeded to the Chapter to hear Divine Service, and being so
Robed, should attend on the Sovereign to the Chapter-House, thence to
the Chapel, and return with him back in the same manner, until after
Supper, as well those that minded to Sup, as those that should not Sup;
nor might they disrobe, until the Sovereign or his Deputy had put off
his, or declar’d it seasonable for his or their doing so.

BY the same Statute they were enjoined to wear the whole Habit on the
Feast of St. _George_, both at their Progression in the Morning to the
Chapter-House or Chapel, at their return to Dinner from thence to the
Second Vespers, and back to Supper, as also till Supper was over, and
until the Sovereign or his Lieutenant took leave of the rest of the
Knights-Companions.

_Secondly_, IT is manifest from King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes, That the
Eve, the Day of St. _George_, and Morrow following, were to be observed
with solemn Service, and holding of Chapters wheresoever the Sovereign
was resident; tho’ the Grand Feast were Prorogued to a longer Duration;
and when by reason of such Prorogation, they should convene in any
Place besides _Windsor_ to attend the Sovereign for the Solemnization
of St. _George_’s Day, they then must Adorn themselves with the whole
Habit from beginning of the first Vespers, until the last Evening
Service of the same Day.

_Thirdly_, ON such other Days of the Year whereon the Grand Feast is
held by Prorogation, and during such Part of the Eve and Day of the
Feast, as is before appointed when it is held on its proper Day.

_Fourthly_, BY absent Knights, whensoever the Grand Feast of St.
_George_ should be celebrated, and wheresoever they should happen at
that time to reside, (if at Liberty, and not under restraint) to keep
it in like manner as if then present with the Sovereign, or his Deputy
in the Place where he should Celebrate the Feast. The time of wearing
the whole Habit in this Point extends but to the End of the second
Vespers, as in the second Instance above.

_Fifthly_, THE Knights-Companions are to wear the entire Habit at the
Feasts of Installation when they assist at that Ceremony; where, if it
commence in the Evening, they are not to disrobe themselves till after
Supper; and being the next Morning habited as before, then to proceed
to the Chapter-House or Chapel, and not to devest themselves till
Dinner is ended.

THE less solemn Occasions are those, which require the wearing the
Mantle or Collar of the Order only.

AND they are first, upon the Morrow after the Grand Feast-Day, when the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions proceed to the Chapel, and make their
Offering; then it sufficeth, that they barely put on the Mantle, which,
Service being Finished, they were wont to leave it at the
Chapter-House-Door as they retired out of the Chapel.

_Secondly_, AS often as Chapters are called, and in what Place soever
assembled, either for Elections, or other Causes, as it shall please
the Sovereign to nominate: And as often as it is requisite for the
Sovereign, or any of the Knights-Companions to enter into the Chapel of
St. _George_ at _Windsor_; and in reference hereunto, is the Article 15
_E._ 3. was that their Mantles should remain in the Vestry at
_Windsor_, that upon any sudden emergency, they might be in readiness:
for in the Inventory of the Chapel taken 8 _R._ 2. we find remaining at
that time in the Vestry, a Mantle appertaining to the Sovereign,
another to _John_ Duke of _Britain_, a third to _John Holland_ Earl of
_Huntington_, another to _Edmund Langley_ Earl of _Cambridge_, and one
to _Thomas Holland_, Earl of _Kent_, all of them then surviving: And by
a Decree past at the Grand Feast 1 _H._ 6. the Mantle of the young
Sovereign was appointed to be left at _Windsor_, as the Statutes
required; and this Article was confirmed by King _Henry_ VIII. by
Virtue whereof, the Mantles of the Emperor _Charles_ V. and _Anna_ Duke
of _Montmorency_, were left in the Custody of the Dean and Canons of
_Windsor_. And heretofore in the Bill of drawing up Matters necessary
for the Installation of a Knight-Companion, there were usually two
Mantles set down; one expressed to be left in the College, and the
other for all other Occasions that might intervene.

THESE Mantles thus ordered to be reposed in the College upon emergent
Occasions, were anciently committed to the Custody of the Black-Rod, as
granted by Letters Patent with the Office 1 _H._ 5. And after the Death
of the Owners, devolved to the Dean and Canons of _Windsor_, either for
the publick Use of the Knights-Companions when they casually came to
_Windsor_, or else sold sometimes to the Heirs of the Deceased, or
others who succeeded in the Order, as that of _Charles_ V. was to the
Earl of _Bedford_, and that of the Constable of _France_ lent to the
Earl of _Warwick_, _Ann._ 7 _Eliz._ which appears from the Accounts of
the Chanter of the College, _temp. H._ 4. _H._ 5. _H._ 8. Q. _Eliz._
and _Jac._ 1. who in all times answered the full Benefit thereof to the
College, as being a certain Perquisite to the Dean and Canons, which
they accordingly had and enjoyed.

AND yet we find some of the College made over-bold with the Robe of
_Sigismond_ the Emperour, and sold it while he surviv’d. But the
Archbishop of _York_, who, as Chancellor of _England_, visited the
College, 1431. secured the Money from being distributed among those
that sold it, and reserved the Dividend to the Dean and Chapter that
should chance to be living at that Emperour’s Expiration; and commanded
for the Future under Pain of Excommunication, That no Dean and Canon
should imbezil or aliene any Knights-Companion’s Mantle while he was
alive, but the same should be decently and faithfully kept and
preserved. But we are informed, that this Statute was altered, _Ann._ 9
_Eliz._ and one drawn up to this effect, _That the Knights-Companions
should be bound by Oath to take care by their Wills, that after their
Decease, all the Ornaments which they had received should be restored,
the Robes to the College, and the Jewels to the Sovereign that gave
them_.

IN the last Place, the Times of wearing the Collar of the Order, with
the Great _George_ appendant, which is not only enjoined to be worn (as
part of the Habit) at the grand Feasts and Feasts of Installation, but
also at other times when not any of the rest of the Habit is ordered
(saving the Garter) is to be worn, as in special, _at the principal and
solemn Feasts of the Year_, and other Feast-Days: To which a particular
Order in Chapter, _Ann._ 4 _Eliz._ thus directs,

           The Holy-days and Sundays within the twelve Days.
           St. _Matthias_ Day.
           Holydays in _Easter_-Week.
           St. _Mark_’s Day.
           St. _Philip_ and _Jacob_’s Day.
           Holy-days in _Whitsun_-Week.
           St. _Peter_’s Day.
           St. _James_’s Day.
           St. _Bartholomew_.
           St. _Matthew_.
           St. _Luke_.
           St. _Simon_ and _Jude_.
           St. _Andrew_.
           St. _Thomas_.

BESIDES these, the Sovereigns and Knights-Companions have been
accustomed to wear this Ensign upon the Anniversary of the Sovereign’s
Coronation, of the _Gun-Powder Treason_, and, of later Times, on the
Sovereign’s Birth-day: So formerly upon some occasional Ceremonies not
relative to the Order; as when a Knight-Companion hath been created
into Titles of Dignity and Honour, he had the Collar of the Garter
added to his Investiture, as appears in the Case of _Henry Stafford_,
created Earl of _Wiltshire_, _Ann._ 1 _Hen._ 8. And at a Chapter held
_May_ 22d. 1622. That such Knights-Companions as should afterwards
assist at the Funeral of any Knight-Companion, should wear the Collar
_apert_ at the said Funeral. And it was so observed by the Dukes of
_Ormond_ and _Richmond_, the Earls of _Manchester_ and _Sandwich_, at
the Obsequies of _George Monk_ Duke of _Albemarle_.

Howbeit, the Custom is otherwise as to wearing the Garter, the
principal Ensign of the Order; for tho’ it be injoyned to be wore at
the grand Festivals, _&c._ yet it does not imply that it might be left
off: For indeed it ought daily to be worn both by the Sovereign and
Knights Companions. And therefore was it decreed even in its
Institution, That if any Knight-Companion should in publick be found
without one buckled about his Leg, upon Challenge he should be mulct a
Noble to the Dean and College of _Windsor_. By King _Henry_ VIII. the
Fine was raised a Mark, payable as before to any of the five Officers
of the Order, or to the Dean; besides which Fine, the Knight lies
liable to a Check. But to alleviate the Strictness, and obviating other
Inconveniencies, King _Henry_ V. admitted of a Qualification; and in
case of riding with Boots, ordained, That it might suffice if the
Knight-Companion wore some Ribband or Silk-Lace to represent the
Garter; tho’ in this very Article there is a Proviso, That no
Knight-Companion should enter into Chapter, without his Garter buckled
about the Leg.

In short, King _Henry_ VIII. ordained, That the Gold-Chain whereat the
lesser _George_ (in that Age) hung, should be worn all other days in
the Year, except the Principal and Solemn Feasts, whereon the great
Collar was ordained to be worn, and except in time of War, Sickness, or
long Voyage, in any of which Cases, a Silk-Lace or Ribband, with the
Image of St. _George_ thereat, was sufficient; and the blue Ribband
having since succeeded in Place of the Gold Chain, the Injunction of
this Statute extends to it in all particulars.




                               CAP. VIII.


§ 1. CONCERNING the Officers appointed for the service of the Order, to
give it a greater degree and augmentation of Honour, the Founder
constituted a _Prelate_, _Register_ and _Usher_, assigning them several
Duties. Some of his Successors added the _Chanchellor_ and _Garter_,
and all of them Sworn to be of the Council of the Order; among these
the _Prelate_ and _Chanchellor_ are usually nominated the Principal,
the other three the inferiour Officers of the Order.

IN this Chapter we shall give some account of their Institution, Oath,
Habit, Ensigns, Privileges and Pensions; for as to the nature of their
Offices and their Duties, they are for the general, Recorded in the
Black Book, under the Title _Constutiones ad Officiales Ordinis
[Garterij] peculiariter attinentes_, &c. Upon the Establishment, _Anno_
13. _Hen._ VIII. 1521. and annex’d to his Statutes, and more
particularly their Duties, will occur in several places of the ensuing
Discourse, where they properly fall in to be Treated of, as follows;

THE Prelate is the first and primier Officer, and in the Founders
Statutes, call’d _Prælatus Ordinis_; and that the then Bishop of
_Winchester_, _William de Edyngton_ was the first Prelate is very
obvious from thence; he is an Officer of Honour only, and hath neither
Pension nor Fees allowed him by the said Constitutions; this Office is
vested in the Bishop of _Winchester_, for the time being; and from the
Annals of the Order it’s manifest his Successors have continued
Prelates to this Day, except the interruption only of a few Months,
_Anno_ 7. _Ed._ 6. immediately after the publishing this King’s
Statutes; wherein the other Four Officers were constituted anew, to
attend the Order, but the Prelate wholly laid by.

WHAT high reputation this See hath been favour’d with, may be collected
from an Act of Parliament, 31. _Hen._ VIII. concerning the Placing of
the Lords in Parliament Chamber, and other Assemblies and Conferences
of Council, whereby this Bishop had Place assigned him next to the
Bishop of _Durham_, who hath place by that Act, next the Archbishop of
_York_; tho’ before in respect of the prehemenence of this noble Order,
he had precedence and Place granted above all Bishops, and next unto
the Arch-Bishops. At that Officers admittance he is oblig’d to take an
Oath in the presence of the Soveraign or his Lieutenant, which consists
of these particulars.


1. _To be present in all Chapters, whereunto he is Summoned._

2. _To report all things truly without Favour or Fear._

3. _To take the Scrutiny faithfully, and present it to the Sovereign._

4. _To keep secret, and not disclose the Councils of the Order._

5. _To promote and maintain the Honour of it._

6. _To withstand and reveal what is designed to the contrary._


THIS Oath is read in Chapter, by the Register of the Order, the
Gentleman-Usher of the Black-Rod, holding the Book, whilst the Prelate
Kneels between the Sovereign’s Knees.


                              Of the ROBE.

AS the Knights-Companions had their Surcoats bestowed on them, at the
Sovereigns charge, and therefore called the Kings Livery, so had the
Officers of the Order their Liveries or Robes out of the Sovereign’s
Wardrobe, and in particular the Prelate of the Order: For in the Rolls
of the great Wardrobe, we find that _William de Edyngton_ had allow’d
him for his Robe of the Sovereign’s Livery, against the Feast of St.
_George_, Anno 37. _Ed._ III. one Cloth of Sanguine grain, and a large
quantity of Furs for trimming it up: And we find this Robe so assigned
the Prelate to be of the sute or colour of the Knights-Companions
Surcoats the same Year, _viz._ Sanguine in grain, and that he had a
great allowance of Furr; for his being a Mantle was larger than any of
the Knights Surcoats, tho’ they are both call’d by the same name _Roba_
in the Rolls of the Wardrobe, _Anno_ 7. _Rich._ II. _William de
Wyckham_ then Prelate had the same allowance, one Cloth of Violet in
grain and other Materials. But the Discrimination was in the Bellies of
Minevers, whose Number was now much encreased, and that the same
allowance was bestowed on him in the 11th and 19th Years of the said
King. But in these three Instances the Colour of the Cloth was
different, and suitable to the Knights-Companions Surcoats, those very
Years, _viz._ Violet in grain, White and Blue, and _Anno_ 12. _Hen._
VI. the Robe of _Henry Beaufort_, Cardinal and Prelate was White, as
then were the Surcoats of the Knights-Companions, whence it is evident
the Livery formerly allowed the Prelate annually varied in Colour, as
did the Knights-Companions Surcoats.

IN that ancient Precedent of the Liveries of the Garter, remaining in
the great Wardrobe, wherein the Surcoats of the Knights-Companions are
reduced to a Stated proportion in the measure of the Cloth, number of
Furs and Garters, modeled out according to their state degrees, there
the Prelate hath the following allowance for his Livery,

  24 Yards of Woollen Cloth.
  18 Timber pur   } Minever.
  18 Timber gross.}
   3 Timber de Biss.

BY all which it is manifest what Materials and colour the Prelate’s
Robe was of at the institution of the Order, and for a long time after,
nor do we find any variation until the Reign of King _Hen._ VIII. and
then this Habit was ordained to be Crimson Velvet, lin’d with white
Taffaty, faced with blue, and thereon down the opening before upon the
bordures, sundry Royal cognizances on the right side, the Rose of
_England_ Crowned, on the left side opposite one of King _Edw._ IV’s.
Badges, _viz._ a Rose within the Sun Beams Crowned; and then the
aforesaid Badges again _vice versa_, with more Damaskings; on the right
side the Flower de luce of _France_ Crowned, and on the left side King
_Edw._ III’s. peculiar Badge, _viz._ The Sun Beams issuing out of a
Cloud, and those Badges repeated in alternate situations; every Badge
interpolated with an Area of Embroidered Damasking; Forty of these
Clouds wrought of Gold, Silver and Silk, having in the middle the
_Saxon_ Letter _E_ of Gold, were provided to him several Garments made
for that King 21 _Edw._ III. and Embellished with Stars. As the left
Shoulder of a Knight Companions Mantle, so the right Shoulder of the
Prelates Robe is injoyned to be Embroidred with a Scutcheon of St.
_George_’s Arms, encompassed with a Garter, and adorned with Cordons of
blue Silk mingled with Gold. After a while the colour of this Robe
became changed to Murray. The allowance of Velvet 16 Yards, of white
Sarcenet for Lining 12 Yards, and a Garter for the Shoulder, Embroidred
with Purls of Damask Gold. But 23 _Eliz._ for the Livery of Bishop
_Watson_ then newly admitted, the quantity of Velvet was encreased to
18 Yards; but the Lining and Garter remained as it was, so also the
Cordon, having Buttons and Tassels of blue Silk, and _Venice_ Gold; the
like Robe in all particulars were made for Bishop _Cooper_, and Bishop
_Bilson_, his Successars, _Temp. Eliz._

ABOUT 12 _Car._ I. the Prelate and Chancellor Petition’d the Sovereign
to restore them their ancient Rights and Privileges of Honour, in
relation to their Ensigns and Robes upon their outward Garments,
whereupon 13 _Car._ I. it was Ordered in Chapter, that the
Knights-Commissioners (newly Established by that Chapter) should take
into their consideration the Robes the Prelate and Chancellor were to
be invested with, and certify the Sovereign the ancient Colour and
Fashion; but nothing was effected untill after the Restoration, and
then by Warrant under the Signet of the Order, Dated _February_ 19. 13.
_Car._ II. the Prelate had assigned him for his Livery of the Order,
one Robe of Purple Velvet, containing 18 Yards, and 10 Yards of white
Taffaty for Lining, as also the Arms of St. _George_ within a Garter,
wrought with Letters, and Purls of Damask, Gold and Pearls, having
Laces, Buttons and Tassels of purple Silk, and _Venice_ Gold; but what
inducements the Sovereign had for so changing the Murray Colour for
Purple, has not reached our Intelligence. The time he is obliged to
Wear this Robe, is in express text of the Constitutions, to be Yearly
on the Vigil and Day of St. _George_, wheresoever he is at liberty,
whether it be in Parliament, or any other solemn Occasion, or Festival
whatsoever.

THE Honours conferred on this Officer, are, that his Post in all
Proceedings and Ceremonies of the Order, is on the right Hand of the
Chancellor; that he hath the Privilege of Marshalling his Arms within
the ennobled Garter, and accordingly hath it been customary to surround
them, impaling his See. He hath allotted him convenient Appartments
within the Castle of _Windsor_, in a Tower Situated on the North-side,
called _Winchester_ Tower; and as often as he shall Arrive thither, or
to any other Place at the Sovereign’s Command, upon the Affairs of the
Order, he ought to have allowed him of the Court Livery for Himself and
Retinue, according to the Stipends, that Earls resident in Court do
possess. 2 _Car._ I. This Officer (so well as the Chancellor) had the
Honour allowed him, to Wear upon the left Part of his Cloak, Coat, and
riding Cassock, at all seasons, when he should not be Invested with his
Robe, and in all Places, and Assemblies, a Scutcheon of the Arms of St.
_George_, but not inriched with Pearls and Stones. But not long after
there was some restraint upon this Act, tho’ I do not find it repealed.


§ 2. THE institution of the Chancellors Office, his Oath, Robe, Badge,
and Pension next follows to be handled. At the Erecting this Noble
Order, the common Seal was ordained to remain in the custody of
whomsoever the Sovereign should please to lodge it, but expresly to be
one of the Knights-Companions; among whom in after-times, Sir _John
Robertsack_ is Stiled _Custos Sigilli Ordinis_, having the custody of
it by Decree, 1. _Hen._ VI. by a Prolepsis of Speech, Styled Chancellor
in the Black Book. But King _Edw._ IV. finding it requisite to fix the
Office of Chancellor of the Garter, in a Person distinct from the
Knights-Companions, and subservient to them, Decreed in a Chapter at
_Westminister_, 16 _Regni sui_, That the Seal of the Order should be
resigned to _Richard Beauchamp_, then Bishop of _Salisbury_ to keep
during pleasure, and he to be called Chancellor of this most noble
Order; not long after by Letters Patent, under the Great Seal of
_England_, Dated the 10th of _Oct._ 15. _Edw._ IV. this King declared,
that tho’ this Office was not expressed by the Founder’s Statutes, yet
was it nevertheless very useful, and therefore for the Advancement, and
good of the Order, he constituted an Officer named Chancellor: And
forasmuch as this Office was of great Import and Concern, and required
an expert and able Person, it was His further Pleasure, that none but a
Bishop should Execute it; moreover considering the Chapel of St.
_George_ at _Windsor_, was Founded within the Diocess of _Salisbury_,
and having regard to the prudence and diligence of the said
_Beauchamp_, who out of meer love to the Order, attended daily the
progress of the Work, wherewith the King was then in hand for enlarging
the Chapel at _Windsor_; he did therefore Ordain the said Bishop for
the Term of his Life, Chancellor of the Order, and after his decease,
his Successors, Bishops of _Salisbury_, should always have and hold the
said Chancellor-ship; Nevertheless, provided that the King’s Concession
should be put in execution, by the Advice of the Knights-Companions,
and without prejudice to the Bishop of _Winchester_, in those things
which ought by the Statutes of Institution to belong unto him.

THIS Office thus conferred upon _Beauchamp_ personally for Life, and
perpetually to his Successors, Bishops of _Salisbury_, by vertue of
this Grant continued Chancellors, nor doth it appear that any other
Person had been invested therein, until _Ann._ 7. _E._ VI. that Sir
_William Cecil_, then principal Secretary of State, was made Chancellor.

FOR upon Reformation of the Order by that King, his Statutes wholly
excluded the Ecclesiasticks, and appointed that the Chancellors-Office
should be executed by a Knight qualified, with Honour and Reputation to
manage a Post of that Care and Fidelity; he thereupon appointed Sir
_William Cecil_, Chancellor; And here first entred a secular Person,
notwithstanding which in a Charter to the Bishop of _Salisbury_, 4
_Eliz._ (containing the Charters of Queen _Mary_, _H._ VIII. and _H._
VII. and in another 4. _Car._ I.) the forementioned Letters Patents,
made to _Beauchamp_, by King _Edw._ IV. are therein recited _totidem
verbis_, and confirmed as a Tacit Reservation of the Right and Title of
those Bishops, whensoever the Sovereign should have a benign and
propitious Aspect towards that See. The first of these Bishops who
concerned himself for recovering this high Station to that See, was
Bishop _Cotton_, who upon the Death of Sir _Edward Dyer_, sometime
Chancellor, Petitioned the Sovereign, 6. _Jac._ I. and prayed
Restitution thereof to the Church of _Salisbury_; but before any
determination, the two chief Justices, and chief Baron was advised
withal, who were of Opinion, that this Office was not compleatly or
sufficiently annexed to the Bishoprick of _Salisbury_ by King _Edw._
IV. But _Cook_ in his Institutes, reports the point Void, upon the
incertainty of the Grant, for that a new Office was Erected, and not
defined what Jurisdiction or Authority the Officer should Exercise; and
there’s assigned a third Reason, That the Grant was in the Sovereign’s
disposal, because the Patent was obtained without Fee; with one or more
of these Opinions, the Sovereign’s judgment being swayed, He forthwith
nominated Sir _John Herbert_, one of His privy Council to the
Chancellor-ship, and so this affair remained Silent, until _Anno_ 12.
_Car._ I. when _John Davenant_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, upon Sir
_Francis Cranes_ decease, remonstrated to the Sovereign his Claim to
this Office, whereupon at a Chapter held at _Windsor_, 5th of _Dec._
that Year, the Sovereign propos’d to the Knights-Companions present,
that tho’ he had made Election of Sir _Thomas Rowe_ for his Chancellor
that time, yet understanding a Claim made by the Bishop of _Salisbury_,
that the Place was annexed to that See, he commanded the
Lords-Companions to take the pretence of right into their
considerations; to which proposition of the King’s, they answered that
they thought it not their duty to search for the Title of any Person,
but that if the Bishop did produce his Evidence and Proofs, he might
present it in Chapter to be considered.

UPON this Encouragement, the Bishop presented a Petition, which was
read in the Chapter at _Windsor_, the 18th of _April_ ensuing, to this
effect, That King _Edw._ IV., by Letters Patent, had Erected this
Office of Chancellor, and did then grant the same to _Richard
Beauchamp_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, and his Successors for ever, in
consideration that the Chapel of St. _George_ was within their Diocess;
that those Bishops had enjoyed the same, according to the Charter,
which Charter had been confirmed under the Great Seal of _England_, by
some other Kings and Queens, and lastly by the King himself. But that
the use and exercise of that Office had for many Years been
discontinued from them, praying therefore an Hearing, and Examination,
that the right of the said Church might be preserved and restored. To
the substance of which it was objected.

_First_, THAT> the Great Seals of _England_ did not work within, or
upon the Statutes and Rules of the Order of the Garter.

_Second_, THAT no Grant could prescribe the present Sovereign, it being
a Law Fundamental within the Order, _Suprema Lex_ was _Suprema
Voluntas_.

_Third_, THAT it did not appear by the Records of the Order, that the
Office of the Chancellor was any otherwise conferred upon _Richard
Beauchamp_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, than _quam diu Regiæ celsitudini
complaceret_.

TO the _First_, It was answered by way of Exception, as to the Grant of
Offices, forasmuch as the Great Seal of _England_ was took into, and
became legal within the Order in like cases; and not any Patent for an
Office, had past under the Seal of the Order, but under the Great Seal
of _England_, and in particular the Office of the Chancellor-ship,
which had not been transacted, if any legal defect had been therein.

TO the _Second_, granting it was so as was Objected, it appeared that
the Sovereign was as much at liberty to restore this Office to the See
of _Salisbury_, as continue it to secular Dignities.

TO the _Third_, what was alledged out of the Records of the Order,
related only to the time of delivering the Seals to Bishop _Beauchamp_:
But afterwards when the Office was Erected by Letters Patent, it was
then granted to him during Life. Something was replied from the Judges
Opinions, even in this case, _Ann. Jac._ R. VI. But the Sovereign
thought it was not then well canvass’d and weighed, to permit the
Chapter Acts of this Order, wholly independant from other Laws, to
receive construction and determination from the common Law, and
therefore declared that the Bishop ought to be heard; and to that
purpose, gave him Orders to prepare the Vouchers and Proofs of his
pretensions in vindication of his Petition, and to send them to be
delivered to the Knights-Commissioners, elected for the affairs of the
Order, for their consideration at the next Chapter, which was
accordingly put in execution, and then refierred to them again to be
considered, prepared and abbreviated, to be perused by the Sovereign,
for his final determination. But the _Scotch_ War shortly after
breaking forth, and troubles running high at Home, the further
Prosecution was laid aside, and not revived until the 19th of _Nov._
_Anno_ 21. _Car._ II. When _Seth Ward_, Bishop of _Salisbury_, took
encouragement upon the former grounds, and the Sovereign’s favour, to
set on foot this Claim, by a Petition presented to the Chapter then
held at _Whitehall_, where, after a full debate and mature deliberation
had of its equity and just Foundation, he obtained a Decree for
Re-establishment of this Office on the Bishops of that See, upon the
first vacancy, Dated the 19th of _Nov._ 1669. and present his Majesty
the Sovereign, the Dukes of _York_, and _Ormond_, Earls of _Oxford_ and
_Manchester_, Prince _Rupert_, Earls of _Bristol_ and _Sandwich_, and
the Duke of _Monmouth_.


                              Of the OATH.

THE Oath the _Chancellor_ takes at his Admission which we find to be
the same with the Prelates, and in the like humble Posture upon the
Knee, and usually Administred by the Register of the Order. As to his
Robe, it was at first the same with the Prelates, both for Cloth and
Colour, but his proportion of Cloth far less, having allowed him but 5
Yards, when the Prelate had 24, nor but 3 Timber of Minever gross,
where the Prelate had 19, beside a large quantity of other Furs; nor
was the Colour confined to one kind, until the constitutions of this
Office appointed it to be Crimson, as was the Prelates, for no doubt it
was before annually changed, as his was to the Colour of the
Knights-Companions Surcoats; however by the Picture of the ancient
Habits of the Officers, it is conspicuous, it was debared the Royal
Badges, wherewith the Prelates Rose was Embroidred; when the Colour of
the Prelates Robe was changed to Murray, the Chancellors had the same
Alteration and was Trim’d alike in all other particulars. The
proportion allowed to Sir _Thomas Smith_ for his Livery, _Anno_ 14.
_Eliz._ was 18 Yards of Murray Velvet, 12 Yards of Sarcenet for the
Lining, one Garter wrought with Pearls of Damask Gold for the Shoulder,
one Lace (or Cordon) with Buttons, and Tassels of blue Silk and
_Venice_ Gold, and the same Materials and Quantities were afterwards
distributed out of the Sovereigns great Wardrobe, to the succeeding
Chancellors.

BUT _Anno_ 13. _Car._ I. The Prelate and Chancellor endeavouring a
Reformation in this Habit, the Dye both of the Prelates and this
Officers Robe was changed into Purple.

BESIDES this Robe, the Chancellor of the Order hath an honourable Badge
of Distinction assigned him to wear, first granted to Sir _William
Peters_ and his Successors, the 9th of _October_, 1 and 2 _Ph._ and
_Mar._ _viz._ a golden Rose enclosed within a Garter, which he and his
Successors, Chancellors of the Order, have ever since worn daily about
their Necks; at first it was Pendant in a Gold-Chain, but since in a
Purple Ribband. It seems something of this Design had been in Agitation
a little before, so soon as the Chancellorship became vested in a
Layman; for King _Edward_ VI’s Statutes did Ordain, _That the
Chancellor should wear about his Neck a Cross of the Order, with a red
Rose, in a white, of Gold, all compassed within a Garland of red and
white Roses_.

AND because it was suggested to King _Charles_ I. That there were
different Accounts and Uncertainties contained in some Books concerning
the Wearing of this Badge, He, by Warrant dated at _Oxford_ the 16th of
_December_ in the 21st Year of his Reign, 1645. ordained Sir _James
Palmer_ Kt. and Bart. Chancellor of the said Order, (and his
Successors) _should wear about his Neck at all times in Honour of his
said Place, (that thereby he may be known to be of that Office and
Dignity, as hath been accustomed) a Medal or Jewel of Gold enamelled
with a red Rose, (within a Garter of Blue enamel, with this Sentence
inscribed_, Hony soit qui mal y pense) _or such an one as we or the
rest of the Knights-Companions of the said Most Noble Order of the
Garter do or shall from time to time hereafter wear in our Collars of
the said Order in particular Reference to us or them. And in the
Reverse thereof, he shall bear the Escutcheon of St._ George _enamelled
within a Garter also in reference to the Order it self, which he only
shall wear hanging by a light purple Ribband, or in a gold Chain, as
hath been accustomed_.

AMONG the Officers of the Order, the Chancellor is seated next beneath
the Prelate, and in all Proceedings and Sessions, goeth, and sitteth,
on his left Hand: And as it was ordered by the Constitutions of the
Officers, That if the Chancellor hapned to be a Layman, he should be
also a Knight, and have other personal Endowments. So did King
_Charles_ I. conceive it requisite to confer some further Mark of
Distinction upon this Officer, in relation to Place and Precedence
without the Order; to which effect, there passed a Decree in a Chapter
assembled by the Sovereign at _Whitehall_, the 23d of _April_, 1623.
present, the Earls of _Mulgrave_, _Montgomery_, _Rutland_, _Carlisle_,
_Holland_, _Suffolk_, _Pembroke_, _Arundel_ and _Surrey_, _Salisbury_,
_Dorset_, _Bark-shire_ and _Northampton_, _That Sir_ Francis Crane,
_the present Chancellor, and all others that should succeed him in that
Place hereafter, shall, in right of that Place, in all Assemblies, and
upon all Occasions, be ranked and placed immediately after
Knights-Privy-Councellors, and before the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
the Persons holding both Places, being in_ Pari gradu, _and
consequently before all others, whom the said Chancellor is to
precede_, &c.

AND to the intent the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s Place may be
certainly known, _May_ the 20th, 21 _Jac._ I. it was thus established,
_That the Knights of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, the
Privy-Councellors, the Master of the Courts of_ Wards _and_ Liveries,
_the Chancellor and Under Treasurer of the_ Exchequer, _Chancellor of
the_ Dutchy, _the Chief Justice of the Court of_ King’s Bench, _the
Master of the_ Rolls, _the Chief Justice of the Court of_ Common-Pleas,
_the Chief Baron of the_ Exchequer, _and all other Judges and Barons of
the Degree of the Coif, should have Place and Precedency in all Places,
and upon all Occasions before the younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons,
and before all Baronets_, &c.

THE aforesaid Constitutions provide the Chancellor of the Order an
Habitation within the Castle of _Windsor_, as well as the Prelate,
which is the South-West Tower in the lower Ward of the Castle, call’d
the _Chancellor’s Tower_. The Possession thereof had been for some time
in the Power of others; and therefore by a Chapter convened at
_White-hall_, _Nov._ 5th, 5 _Car._ I. it was restored unto Sir _Francis
Crane_, then Chancellor of the Order, and after his Decease, to descend
to his Successors. These Constitutions also ordained him the like
Liveries at the Table and Court of the Sovereign, as were allowed to
the Prelate.

AT the first Erection of this Office, the Chancellor had no Pension
awarded him, until the Constitutions in reference to the Officers were
Established. At that time there was conferr’d on him a Pension of
100_l._ _per Annum_, in consideration of his Employment, or else an
allowance proportionate in Fees, Offices or other Promotions, over and
above his Lodgings in the Castle, and Liveries at Court. But as to Fees
and Perquisites, there are none to be Claimed by this Officer; and for
that Reason, he not only possesses the said Pension, but all his
disbursements allowed him, even to Paper, Wax, and Wafers; and indeed
those who enjoyed the Office esteem’d it as a degradation of their
Post, to receive either fee, or gratuity for any affair Transacted
within the Order; and Sir _Thomas Rowe_, sometime Chancellor, affirmed
_That his Office was an Office of Honour, and not of Fees, and that he
had always excepted against Fees, for the disbursement of the
Sovereign’s Money_: Tho’ he acknowledged some had bestowed on his Clerk
a small gratuity, for the bare Ingrossing of an Alms Knights Patent,
but nothing farther.

AND because the Custody of the Seals of the Order, appertains to this
Officer; it will be here the fittest Place to mention something of
them. By the Statutes of _Edw._ III. they were to have a Common Seal.
This is confirmed by the Statutes of King _Hen._ V. and since named the
Great Seal of the Order. The use of this is not only to Seal the
Original Statutes, appointed to remain perpetually within the Treasury
of _Windsor_ College, as also those Copies of which each
Knight-Companion is obliged to conserve one, but likewise all Letters
of Licence to any of the Knights-Companions desirous of winning Honour
abroad, and all Mandates and Certificates, relating to the Order.

AFTER what Model the first Seal was compos’d, we have no exact
Relation. _Polydore Virgil_ tells us, That when the Founder of the
Order had fixed Choice of St. _George_ for its Patron, he represented
him Armed, and Mounted on an Horse, bearing a Silver Shield, and
thereon a Red Cross, but whether St. _George_ thus designed, was on the
first Seal, or only a Scutcheon of his Arms, as in latter times, is
uncertain. But his Author observes that the Founder Habited his
Soldiers in white Jackets or Coats, and on their Breasts and Backs
sowed Red Crosses, parallel to the Arms assigned to St. _George_, as
well as to the Kingdom of _England_, put under his Patronage, which
Arms the Sovereigns of the Order, have ever since exhibited in their
Standards. But besides this Common Seal King _Hen._ V. in the 9th Year
of his Reign, Instituted a privy Signet, in case the Sovereign should
be called out of this Kingdom upon weighty Affairs. The intent thereof
was to affix it to all Acts passed by the Sovereign beyond Sea, to
distinguish them from those of his Deputies in _England_. King _Hen._
VIII’s Statutes, Ordain the making both of a Common Seal and Signet,
and direct that the Arms of the Order should be Engraven upon each of
them. The Common Seal used in his Reign was a Garter, within it a
Shield having the Cross of St. _George_, impaling the National Arms,
the said Shield encompassed with two Branches hanging from the Regal
Crown, which debruses part of the Garter; the Signet being designed
after the same manner, but less: _Temp. Jac._ I. it suffered no other
alteration, but only in the National Arms, by admitting the Quarterings
of _Scotland_ and _Ireland_, and new-fashioning the Crown, omitting the
suspension of the Shield.

THERE was a Seal made at the beginning of the Reign of King _Cha._ I.
which being esteemed too little for the Grandure and Honour of the
Sovereigns Commissions, if was afterwards Decreed in Chapter, held 18th
of _April._ 13. Car. I. _That a new one should be made of a larger
Size, with the accustomed Arms and Motto, and the care thereof commited
to Sir_ Thomas Rowe, _Chancellor_; which Command he Executed with all
due care and regard, as is manifestly evident by the nobleness of the
design: One Representation being St. _George_, in Armour, adorned with
a waveing Mantle, his Bever open, his Helmet plumed, holding a Shield
of his Arms in his left Hand, and striking with a Sword in his right,
his Body mounted on a bold Horse, Trampling over a Dragon, which
Assails the Champion, the whole Figure is well contracted, and the Sun,
a Rock, the Bones of devoured Men, and a Mountain in _Lointon_, in it
is Circumscribed, _Magnum sigillum Nobilis Ordinis Garterij_; having
the enrichments of festons between every Word placed pentagonally: The
other Representation, is the Royal Garter imperially Crowned, enclosing
a Shield of the Arms of St. _George_, impaling the Sovereign’s Arms,
the same Bordered with Fret-work, and other Ornaments in Cartouche. In
the same decree, direction was given also for a new Signet, the former
being thought too big for Letters, and this was an Oval shaped so from
its Impression, which was the Garter Crowned, wherein was St. _George_,
and the Sovereigns Arms impaled.

IT was at the same Chapter further decreed; “That all Legations to
deliver this Order to Foreign Princes, all other Acts, bearing the
Stile of Commissions, all Patents of Offices and Fees, all Grants or
Licences sent out of the Kingdom, should be Sealed with this Seal,
which should be henceforward called the Great Seal of the Order; so
also the Book of Statutes, sent to Elect Knights or Foreign Princes,
being fixed to a Label of Blue Silk, and held according to antient
Custom; and that all Letters concerning the Order, whether of
signification of Election, or Lieutenancy, or Summons upon prorogation,
or other Directions from the Sovereign, should only be Sealed with the
Signet: Moreover, these Seals were appointed to be thenceforth Born
before the Sovereign in all Publick Assemblies, during the Celebration
of St. _George_’s Feast, or in other its Solemnities by the Chancellor
of the Order, in a Purse of blue Velvet,” and Command given to Sir
_Thomas Rowe_, to provid one accordingly; on the foreside of which
Purse was richly Embroidred (by a Gold-Smith) with _Venice_ Gold and
Silver, Gold and Silver Purls and Plates, and variety of _Naples_
Silks, the Arms of St. _George_ impaling the Sovereign, surrounded with
a Garter Crowned, having a very fair Running Work, or Compartment round
about it, the charge of which amounted to 13 _l._ 16 _s._ 10 _d._

BY the Statutes of Institution, it was ordained, That in case the
Knights-Companions, to whose care the Sovereign did commit the Seal of
the Order, should upon lawful Occasions, be absent from Court, it
behoves him to leave it behind him, with some other Knight-Companion to
present, to the Sovereign, to the intent it might be always in
readiness; but if the Sovereign be out of His Kingdom, then the
disposal of it, was commited to the Deputies, and the Signet of the
Order should have a Warrant for all such Acts and Decrees as should be
confirmed there.

THE distance from Court was by the Constitutions, restricted to 10
Miles, and by the Statutes of King _Hen._ VIII. to 20. upon
consideration whereof we find Sir _Thomas Rowe_ Chancellor, having some
occasions, _Anno_ 13 _Car._ I. to be absent above 20 Miles, tendred the
Seals to the Sovereign, who was pleased to dispence with the Statutes,
and permitted him to keep them nevertheless.

§ 3. THE Registers Oath, Mantle, Badge, Privileges and Pension, fall
next under our consideration; he was one of the three, Constituted at
the Institution of the Order, under the Title of _Registrator_ and
_Registrarius_, and so is called in the Statutes of King _Hen._ V.
elsewhere in the Books of the Order, _Scriba_ and _Actuarius_. What
were the first Registers, names we cannot discover, till the Reign of
King _Hen._ V. But it may be presumed, they were Canons of _Windsor_;
because this Office was at first assigned to one of that College;
besides the Registers from the Reign of King _Henry_ V. to the
beginning of King _Henry_ VIIIth Reign, were also Canons of this
College, among whom was _John Coningham_, (and the first found called
so) as the Fragments of a Glass Inscription in _Clare_ Church near
_Windsor_, where he was Rector, attests. The first Dean of _Windsor_,
Constituted Register of the Order was _John Vesey_, Anno 8. _Hen._
VIII. many of whose Successors in this Deanry, have since been
admitted; nevertheless, as they were Canons not Deans of _Windsor_, and
tis not improbable the Deans were Elected to this Office, as being
enabled to support the Reputation of the Registership, with the Revenue
of his Deanry, better than any of the Canons, with the addition of the
Pension. But at a Chapter held at _Whitehall_, the 22d of _April_, 11
_Car._ I. The Sovereign thought it convenient that the Office of Dean
and Register should concenter in one and the same Person, as formerly,
and therefore commanded this his Pleasuer to be Enrolled among the
Annals of the Order, that so it might pass in the future Times, from
Example into Rule.

BY the Constitutions of the Office, a secular Person is made capable of
it, no less than an Ecclesiastick, how be it, _He is to be a Man of
singular integrity_, eminent quality, a Knight, and signalized for
Experience and Learning; but if an Ecclesiastick, then must he be a
Person of consummate Erudition, _a professor of Divinity or Law, either
Canon, or Civil_, and a Dignitarian in some Cathedral Church, or else a
Canon at _Windsor_.

THE substance of his Oath in the Statute of the Institutions was, _That
he should enter upon the Registry, with all Fidelity, the Scrutinies,
Elections, Penalties, Reconciliations, and all other Acts relating to
the Order_, to which was added, that he shall faithfully Discharge his
Duty in all things. But in King _Hen._ VIIIth Days, the Oath enjoyned
him, differs nothing from that of the Prelates and Chancellors.

AT his Admission, he takes this Oath Kneeling, while the Prelate used
to pronounce the Words as _Anno_ 1 _Mar._ 5. and 6. _Ph._ and _Mar._
but in his absence, as _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ the Chancellor administred it.
_Anno_ 4. _Car_. I. the Prelate, Chancellor, and Register, took their
Oaths at one time, and then it was thus Ordered; first the Register
took it Kneeling between the Sovereign’s Knees, the Black Rod holding
the Evangelists, and the _Garter_ read the Words out of the black Book;
this done, the Register read the Words of the Prelates Oath, when he
was Sworn; and in the last place, did the like to the Chancellor; after
this manner did Garter read the Words to the Registers, admitted 11
_Car._ I. and 12 _Car._ II. We cannot trace the Habit this Officer had
assigned him at the Erection of the Order; but it afterwards appears,
that his Allowance was the same with the Chancellors, consisting of 5
Yards of Woollen Cloth, and 3 Timber of Minever gross, equalent to what
those Knights-Companions had allotted, who were under the degree of an
Earl: The Habit he is pourtrayed in, at a proceeding of King _Hen._
VIIIth Reign, shews it to be Ecclesiastical, a black Gown, a Surplice
over that, reaching to his Ancles, and thereon a Mantle of Furs; but
the Constitutions of his Office restricted him to none, wherein there
seems a defect, since they have assignd Habits to the Garter, and black
Rod. Notwithstanding by a Draught of the Officers in their ancient
Dress, it is plainly demonstrable to be a Mantle, somewhat of a Russel
colour, Faced with a Pane of blue, whereon is Embroidred a
Flower-de-luce Crowned Gold, then another Pane red, thereon a Lyon
Passant gardant Crowned Gold, and so they are alternately placed to the
bottom; to this Mantle belong Cordons of Silk, blue and yellow.

SINCE that time, not only the Registers, but also Garters and Black
Rods, Robes, underwent some Alterations; for by a Decree in Chapter,
called at St. _James_, _Jun._ 1. 4 and 5. _Ph._ and _Mar._ these
Officers were assigned Mantles of crimson Satin, Lined with Taffaty,
and a Scutcheon of St. _George_’s Arms, Embroidred on the left
Shoulder, but not encircled with a Garter, having the same Buttons and
Tassels as were appointed to the Prelate and Chancellor; the proportion
of Satin assigned to each Mantle, was 14 Yards, and as many Yards of
white Taffaty.

AND tho’ the Registers Mantle was _Ann._ 27 _Eliz._ composed of the
preceeding Materials, and had like Trimming, yet they agree not in
their Proportions, here being allowed 18 Yards of crimson Satin, and
but 12 of Taffaty; from hence these Mantles continued immutable until
the 20th of _Feb._ 13 _Car._ II. when there Issued a Warrant to the
Master of the great Wardrobe, to prepare for this Officer, as also for
Garter, and the Black Rod, for their Liveries Mantles of scarlet Satin,
each containing 18, and 10 Yards of white Taffaty for Lining, but
consonant in all other Punctilio’s with the former; yet why the colour
was altered, is not expressed.

THE Register seems to have been represented with a Scrowle in his Hand,
for his Badge, and by the proceedings in Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign,
Pictured with a Book, both proper Symbols of his Office. In Dr.
_Christopher Wren_’s Registership, the Sovereign Commanded him to cover
the red Book of the Order with crimson Velvet, and assigned for the
Garter, two Pens in Saltire, interlacing the Garter above with these
two Letters _C R_ Crowned, all being richly Embroidred, (as also the
Border) with _Venice_ Gold and Silver, and various colours of _Naples_
Silk, by _Harrison_ the Sovereign’s Embroiderer, with a Clasp, in
Imitation of the Garter, surrounding the Representation of St.
_George_, which cost 12 _l._ 17 _s._ 6 _d._ This Book he was Ordered to
bear before his Breast, on all Solemn Occasions when he wore his
Mantle, and for his better Convenience, he made a Belt and an Ouch to
hang it by.

SO high a Regard had the Sovereigns of this Order, not only to this
Officer, but likewise to Garter and Black Rod, that they took them into
a particular Protection, and by the Constitutions of their Offices
granted them, “That they, their Goods and Servants should severally
remain under the Safe-guard of the Sovereign; and if any Injury or
Violence should chance to be offered them either by Subjects or
Forreigners, whensoever they should exhibit their Complaint to the
Sovereign, either himself or the Knights-Companions should afford them
Justice; but if the adverse Party should refuse to submit his Cause to
the Sovereign, then the Sovereign and Knights-Companions should shew
themselves so far inclinable towards these Officers, as to be ready to
allow them all favour, countenance, _&c._” consistent with Justice and
Equity.

UPON the strength and Security of this ancient Privilege, to avoid the
prolongation of a Law Suit, Dr. _Christopher Wren_ Register, Petitioned
the Sovereign in Chapter, held at _Whitehall_, the 19th of _April_, 13
_Car_. I. against one _Thornhill_, who under Pretence of Digging for
Salt-Peter, had so Undermined his Pigeon-house, Built on the Rectory of
_Knoil Magna_ in _Wiltsh._ that it fell down; and upon reading of the
Petition, it was resolved by the Sovereign, and Knights-Companions,
“That they would consider the Grant in the Constitutions, and, until it
was farther declared, the Chancellor of the Order should have Power
upon Information of any rigour upon Controverse begun in any other
Court, to write Letters under the Signet of the Order, that all
vexation against them should be superseded until Information of the
cause were given to and determination in the Cause resumed by the
Sovereign, or leave of him obtained to Proceed.” After this it is set
down, that _Thornhill_ was Summoned before the Lords Commissioners of
the Navy, and his negative Answer given in, and represented to the
Sovereign in another Chapter, conven’d the 4th of _October_ ensuing;
whereupon it was ordered, “That the Chancellor should write to the same
Lords Commissioners, and another to the Earls of _Pembroke_, _Arundel_
and _Dorset_, three of the Knights-Companions, to Empower them, that
they or any three of them, should cause the said _Thornhill_ to be
brought before them, and likewise write to any of the Inhabitants of
_Knoil_, to view and testifie the Truth, to hear any further proof on
the behalf of either Party, and to give Sentence according to Justice,
that so a tedious Suit of Law might be prevented, and the Dignity of
this most noble Order protected.” These Commands of the Chancellor
being Executed, and Certificates returned from the Country, the Knights
Companions, in a Chapter held the 23th of _May_, 14 _Car._ I. were
moved to peruse them; but before they could meet, _Thornhill_ fled, and
the Prosecution of this business ceased. Upon the same footing was it,
that the said Dr. _Wren_ obtained from King _Cha._ I. His Gracious
Protection for himself, Servants, and Estate, literally expressed in
the late War, _as the Violaters of that Order would answer this our
contrary at their Peril, Dated at_ Oxford, _under the Signet of this
our Order the_ 12th _Day of_ Dec. _in the_ 19th _Year of our Reign_.

THIS Officer by the Constitutions hath a Pension of 50 _l._ _per
Annum_, or proportionable in Fees, Offices, or other Emoluments; and
_Ann._ 1. and 2 _Ph._ and _Mar._ the same numerical Pension was
conferred on _Owen Oglethorp_, Dean of _Windsor_, out of the Exchequer,
until some Ecclesiastical Preferment of like value should devolve on
him. The same was confirmed to Dr. _Maxey_, by Decree in Chapter, 16
_Jac._ I. and afterwards to Dr. _Beaumont_, by Letters Patent, under
the Great Seal of _England_, 20 _Jac._ I. but there needed no Allotment
of Lodgings at _Windsor_ to this Officer, as there was to the rest,
since both the Canons and Dean were provided of Houses belonging to
their Ecclesiastical Dignities within the College, at the Erection of
the Order.


§ 4. THE _fourth Officer of the Order is Garter_. He Was ordained
by King _Henry_ V. with the advice and consent of all the
Knights-Companions, who for the Honour of the Order, was pleased he
should be the principal Officer within the College of Arms, and
chief of the Heralds. The Services enjoyned him, relating to the
Order, were in preceding Times, performed by the _Windsor_ Herald
of Arms, an Officer created with that Title by K. _Edward_ III.
much about the time of his Erecting this Order, and an Annual
Pension of 20 Marks, payable out of the Exchequer, by Letters
Patent for Life, which was confirmed by King _R._ II.

SIR _William Brugges_ was the Person first created Garter, and called
in the Institution of his Office, _Jartier Roy d’armys des Anglois_,
but elsewhere stiled _Willielmus Brugges, alias Dictus, Gartier Rex
Armorum_. This Sir _William_ became a great Benefactor to St.
_George_’s Church at _Stamford_, and in the Windows of the Chancel
caused to be Represented King _Edward_ III. with his twenty five
Knights-Companions kneeling, Habited in their Mantles and Surcoats of
Arms, but now much shattered and defaced; _John Smert_ his Successor
had this Office conferred on him by Letters Patents, under this Title
_Rex Armorum de Garteria_, and _John Wrythe_ was stiled _Principalis
Heraldus, & Officiarius inclyti Ordinis Garterij, Armorumq; Rex
Anglicorum_, but Sir _Gilbert Dethick_ leaving out _Heraldus_ joyned
_Principalis Rex_, which still continues.

IN the Constitutions of his Office he is called _Garterus, Rex Armorum
Angliæ_, whom the Sovereign and Knights-Companions have decreed to be a
Gentleman of Blood and Arms, of unspotted Reputation, and Born within
the Kingdom of _England_; besides as King _Hen._ V. did before, so doth
King _Hen._ VIII. declare that he shall be chief of all the Officers of
Arms, dependant upon the Crown of _England_.

THE substance of his Oath administred by the Register at his admission,
whilst he humbly kneeleth at the Sovereign’s Feet, in the Chapter
House; is,

1. _To yield Obedience to the Sovereign, and Knights-Companions._

2. _To keep Silence, and not disclose the Secrets of the Order._

3. _To make Signification of the Death of each Knight-Companion._

4. _To execute all things faithfully committed to his Care._

5. _To enquire diligently after all the noble Acts of the
Knights-Companions, and certifie them to the Register._

6. _To be faithful in the exercise of his Office._

AND such an Oath Sir _Christopher Barker_ took at a Chapter held at
_Greenwich_ 28 _Hen._ VIII. when he was made Garter.

AS for a particular Habit, we do not find any inserted in the Great
Wardrobe, whence it is presumed, he was at first distinguished from the
rest of the Officers of the Order, by his Coat Embroidred with the
Sovereign’s Arms, like as the Provincial King’s then wore. But after
the Constitutions of the Officers were Established, there was assigned
him a Habit or Mantle in all respects, resembling the Register, (saving
that the Ground whereon the Lyons and flower-de-luces were Embroidred,
was entirely Red) and this to be wore only at the publick Solemnities
of the Order. Queen _Mary_ Commanded it to be made of crimson Satin,
and so it remained till the Restoration, when the Colour was altered to
scarlet.

THIS Officer is appointed to bear a white Rod or Scepter at every Feast
of St. _George_, the Sovereign being present, gilded at both ends, and
at the top the Arms of the Order impaling the Sovereign’s Arms
pourtray’d on an oblong Cube Crowned, but no directions are given in
the Constitutions for this Crown, nor for that Ducal one on his Head
wherewith his Effigies has been represented, and yet at all great
Solemnities is never used that we can discover. There was assigned him
by Queen _Eliz._ a Badge of Gold to be worn daily by him and his
Successors, before the Breast, in a gold Chain or Ribband, and thereon
Ennamelled the Sovereign’s Arms, Crowned with an Imperial Crown, and
both surrounded with the Garter: But Sir _Edward Walker_ when made
Garter, obtained the Sovereign’s leave to Impale therein St. _George_’s
Arms, with those of the Sovereign’s, which Badge is alike on both sides.

THERE is an House appointed for his Habitation within _Windsor_ Castle,
called Garters Tower. It was by Chapter annexed for ever to the Office
of Garter, and restored to Sir _William Segar_’s Possession, 2d of
_May_, 1630. By the Constitution of his Office, he is to be allowed
Barons Service in the Sovereign’s Court, and his Table Served next
after the Dean of the Chapel, with such Liveries as of old were
accustomed.

IT appears that King _Hen._ V. after his erecting this Office, died
before he had settled a Pension upon Sir _William Brugges_, for
supportation of his little Estate, which the Knights-Companions taking
into consideration, and that he might more honourably comport himself
to the Service of the Order, till the young King should come to Age,
they being assembled in a Chapter, with the consent of the Prelate,
decreed the said Sir _William_ to receive of each of them at every
Feast of St. _George_, as is set down, _viz._

 {Of the Bishop of _Winchester_ Prelate 5}
 {Dukes     --        --        --      5} Marks.

          {Earl  --   --    6}
 Of every {Baron or Baronet 4} Nobles.
          {Knight Batchelor 2}

THE first payment was agreed to be pay’d down, and so to remain in
force annually with request to the absent Knights, that for the Honour
of the Order, and causes in the Instrument express’d, they would
approve of their Ordinance which passed under the Seal of the Order,
Dated at _Windsor_, 1422. Afterwards King _Hen._ VI. in consideration
of his Services to his Father and himself, with consent of his Council,
granted to the said _Brugges_, by Letters Patent, a Pension of 20 _l._
_per Annum_, out of the Fee Farm of the City of _Winchester_ during his
pleasure, which Pension upon the surrender of his Patent he granted
anew to him and _Agnes_ his Wife, for their Lives and the longer liver
of them; and when this Office upon Sir _William Brugges_ death, was
devolved on _John Smert_, _Guyenne_ herald (3 _April_ 28 _Hen._ VI.) he
had the yearly Sum of 20 _l._ granted him therewith for Life out of the
Exchequer: But his Successor _John Wrythe_, _Norroy_, obtained an
increase of Pension to 40 _l._ _per Annum_, made payable out of the
small Customs of the City of _London_; this annual Sum was afterwards
confirmed to Garter by the Constitution of his Office, and an
Augmentation from the then Knights-Companions additional to the
Pensions granted by their Predecessors, upon the Death of King _Hen._ V.

   {A Duke    --  --    4 Pounds.
   {
   {A Marquess  --      5}
 Of{An Earl   --  --    4} Marks.
   {
   {A Baron     --      6}
   {A Knight Batchelor  4} Nobles.

IN succeeding times the Sovereign thought fit to augment this Pension
to 50 _l._ _per Annum_, (now payable out of the Revenue settled upon
the Order,) and the Knights-Companions yet to enlarge their Sallery,
which they did, (the Sovereign assenting) by the decree made in a
Chapter held at _Windsor_ 13, 14, and 15. _Sept. An._ 1617. wherein it
was ordained, _That their Officer Sir_ William Segar _Garter Knight,
King of Arms of that Order should then, and from thenceforth have
renew’d and paid unto him certain annual Fees and Pensions, anciently
enjoyed by his Predecessors, with a surplus of_ 10 _l._ per Annum,
_which his Majesty’s Act of Royal Bounty, hath given to his said
Servant for his better support and maintenance, as also of Prince_
Charles, _Prince of_ Wales, _the Sum of_ 8 l. _and of every Duke of the
Blood_ 6 l. _all other Estates_, viz. _a Duke not of the Blood_ 4 l. _a
Marquess_ 5 _Marks_, _an Earl_ 4 _Marks_, _a Viscount_ 7 _Nobles_, _a
Baron_ 40 s. _and a Knight Batchelor that shall be of the Order_, 26 s.
8 d. _all which said Sums of Money, according to the several degrees of
their Estates, are to be paid, (continues the Decree) unto the said
Garter or his assigns yearly at St._ Georges_’s Feast, or immediately
after, as well by the Knights then present, as by those that shall be
absent, or hereafter are to succeed in the said Order; and after the
decease of the said Garter, to his Successors for ever._

AT St. _Georges_’s Feast, Celebrated at _Windsor_, 22, 23, and 24 of
_April, Anno_ 15 _Car._ II. Sir _Edward Walker_ then Garter,
representing by Petition, that the annual Pension of the installed
Knights then in Arrear for one Year, amounted to 94 _l._ 13 _s._ 4 _d._
according to their proper proportion, the Sovereigns Share, (he being
to pay for all stranger Knights) amounted at that time, to 32 _l._ 13
_s._ 4 _d._ and humbly praying that his Majesty would grant to him and
his Successors an 100 _l._ _per Annum_, out of the Revenue settled to
the use of the Order, in lieu not only of those said Pensions, payable
from the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, both Strangers and Subjects;
but for resigning his Claim to his annual Pension of 50 _l._ in
consideration for preparing Scutcheons and removal of Atchievements.
This Petition the Sovereign was pleased to refer to a Committe of the
Knights-Companions, who, namely the Duke of _Albemarl_, the Earls of
_Lindsey_, _Manchester_, _Sandwich_, and _Stafford_, who being attended
by Garter, and weighing the event of the Petition, offered their
opinions to the Sovereign, to grant him the said 100 l. _per Annum_ in
lieu of what he offered to quit, whereby the interest of this Office
might be preserved in a more compendious Method than it was, his
Majesty exempted from those small payments for Strangers, and the
Knights-Subjects themselves were discharged from their annual Pension,
and his Majesty ratifying the same shortly after, Sir _Henry de Vic_,
the Chancellor, was ordered to pay unto Garter, and his Successors the
said annual Pension of 100 _l._ which was accordingly put in Execution,
as an Equivalent for all Fees and Salaries relating to the Order of the
Garter.

THE Duty of this Officer in general is, to perform, or cause to be
effected all Transactions whatsoever, the Sovereign, or Prelate, or
Chancellor shall enjoyn him, in relation to this Most Noble Order.


§. 5. THE fifth and last Officer is the _Black-Rod_. This Officer was
instituted by the Founder, King _Ed._ III. but whether at the first
Erection of the Order doth not appear. Howbeit, within a few Years
after, 35 _E._ III. the King conferr’d to _William Whitehorse_, Esq;
for Life, _Officium Hostiarii Capellæ Regis infra Castrum de_
Windesore, with a Fee of 12 _d._ a Day out of his Exchequer.

_Anno_ 3 _Hen._ IV. this Office is called _Officium Virgarij comitivæ
de la Garter infra Castrum Regis de Windesore_; and under that
Denomination was confirmed to _Thomas Sye_, with the Fees and
Emoluments thereunto expressed. In the Patent to his Successor, _John
Athilbrigg_, _Ann._ 1 _H._ 5. it is stiled, _Officium Virgarij sive
Ostiarij_, &c. Afterwards it hath the Title, _Officium Virgæ-bajuli
coram Rege ad festum Sancti_ Georgii _infra Castrum Regis de_
Windesore. And ever since it runs in the Patents by the Appellation of
_Virgæ-Bajulus_, _Virgarius_, or _Nigri-vergifer_. But in the
Constitutions of his Office, he hath the Title of _Hostiarius_; and
under the restriction of these Qualifications, that he be a Gentleman
of Blood and Arms, born within the Sovereigns Dominions; and if he be
not a Knight at his admission into the Office, he ought then to be
Knighted. As _Garter_ was Entituled the Principal Officer of Arms, so
was the _Black-Rod_, for the Honour of the Order, appointed the Chief
Usher in the Kingdom. And as he is so, and frequently called
Gentleman-Usher of the _Black-Rod_, so we shall wave, as we did in
_Garter_, all things appertaining to his Employments, otherwise than
what directly is included in this Most Noble Order.

IN a Chapter held at _Whitehall_, the 13th of _February_, 6 _Car._ I.
It was decreed, _That the Office of the Black-Rod should from
thenceforth successively, as soon as the same should become void_
(_James Maxwell_, Esq; then enjoying it) _be annexed to some one of the
Gentlemen-Ushers, Daily-waiters, whom the Sovereign should appoint_.

THIS was carried upon the Petition of the Gentlemen-Ushers,
Daily-waiters, seconded by the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl-Marshal, and
others, Knights-Companions; as is evident from another Petition of
theirs to the Sovereign in Chapter, assembled at _Oxford_, the 17th of
_January_, 20 _Car._ I. But some Years after this, 1642. the Lord
_Lanrick_, Secretary for _Scotland_, had on Mr. _Maxwell_’s behalf,
obtained the Sovereign’s Warrant for Letters-Patent under the
Great-Seal, for two Lives, _Maxwell_’s and Mr. _Alexander Thayn_, the
longest Liver of them; whereby the said Decree was frustrate to the
Gentlemen-Ushers; of which making Complaint in the last mentioned
Chapter, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions (in regard this latter
Grant was not only repugnant to the preceding Decree, and the
Great-Seal surreptitiously gained, but ought likewise to have passed
the Seals of the Order) order’d _Peter Newton_, Esq; to be presently
sworn into this Office. Nevertheless, after the Restoration, _A. D._
1660. _Newton_ being then dead, the Gentlemen-Ushers, Daily-waiters,
Petition’d again, and _Thayne_ was demanded to put in his Answer; and
the result of the whole was, after mature Deliberation in a Chapter
held at _Whitehall_, the 20th of _February_, 13 _Car._ II. the Decree
which fix’d this Office to one of the Gentlemen-Ushers Daily-waiters,
was confirmed, and _John Ayton_, one of the Petitioners, was sworn
Gentleman-Usher of the Black-Rod, which was performed by the Register
in the Presence of the Sovereign, the Chapter sitting.

THE Form of the Oath given to this Officer, _temp. Hen._ VIII. was,
_Truly and Faithfully to observe and keep all the Points of the
Statutes of the Order as to him belonged and appertained_.

HE hath the like Habit with the Register and Garter before described,
but his Ensign and Badge is somewhat different from Garter’s; for
first, it was ordained, _That he or his Deputy should carry a
Black-Rod_ (whence he hath his Title) _before the Sovereign, or his
Deputy, at the Feast of St._ George, _within the Castle of_ Windsor,
_and at other Solemnities and Chapters of the Order_. On the Top of
which there ought to be set a Lyon of _England_. This Rod serves
instead of a Mace, and has the same Authority to apprehend Delinquents,
and such have offended against the Statutes of this Most Noble Order.
And where he apprehends any one of the Order, as Guilty of some Crime
for which he is to be expell’d the Order, the manner of it is by
touching them with this Black-Rod, and his Fee for it, is 5 _l._

HE has assigned him a Golden Badge to be openly worn in a Gold Chain,
or Ribband, before his Breast, composed of one of the Knots in the
Collar of the Order which tye the Roses together, and encompassed with
a Garter, being alike on both sides; which was conferred on him and his
Successors, by Decree in Chapter, held the 24th of _April_, 8 _Eliz._

’TIS as ancient as _Hen._ Vth’s Reign, for there’s a House in _Windsor_
Castle granted to this Officer by Letters-Patent, during Life. And the
same Provision is made for him by the Constitutions of his Office. It
is situate on the South-side of the Castle in the middle Ward. The said
Constitutions give him Baron-Service at Court, and Livery thereto
appertaining; and besides these, the keeping of the said Castle, and
the two Parks adjacent.

KING _Charles_ I. having taken into his Hands the little Park of
_Windsor_, and bestow’d it upon _James Maxwell_, then Usher of the
Black-Rod, He, at a Chapter held at _Whitehall_, the 5th of _November_,
1629. decreed, That as the Custody of the said Park was conferr’d on
_Maxwell_ in right of his Office; so the same should for ever after be
annex’d thereto, and not to be disposed of but under the Great Seal of
the Order, and that only to the Usher of the Order for the time being.

LASTLY, this Officer had anciently a Fee of 12 _d._ _per diem_, which
we find continu’d down in the Letters-Patents, whereby this Office was
granted. Besides which, the Constitutions of his Office allow him an
annual Pension of 30 _l._ heretofore paid him out of the Exchequer, but
by King _Charles_ I. assigned him out of 1200 _l._ _per Ann._ settled
upon the Order; touching which, and the Payment of the Officers
Pensions upon the new Establishment, is the next Section.


§. 6. KING _James_ I. taking into his Royal Breast, the Constitution of
this Most Noble Order, that it was in the Nature of a Distinct
Sovereignty, govern’d by Laws and Conventions proper to the Body, and
himself as Sovereign in Matters immediately relating thereunto, had the
sole and uncontroulable Authority of revising, adding, or explaining;
and finding that the Pensions paid to the Officers of the Order (as
those to the Alms-Knights) and some other Expences, had been anciently
made payable out of his Exchequer by vertue of the Great Seals of
_England_, or otherwise by Privy-Seals; and conceiving it incongruous,
that the Officers should claim their Pensions by vertue of any other
Seal than that of the Order, for it is in some kind derogatory to the
Honour of the Order, to permit other Seals to be used within the same:
He thereupon with twelve Knights-Companions in a Chapter held at
_Whitehall_, the 22d of _May_, 20 _Jac._ I. passed a Decree, _That all
things concerning the Order should hereafter be ratify’d under the Seal
of the Order only, and in particular, that the Grants of poor Knights
Places, after their being Signed by the Sovereign, should be passed
under the Seal of the Order only, and none other_. And the Year
following, the Chancellor was ordered, _That he should take Advice of
the Sovereign’s_ Attorney-General _how by Vertue of the Seal of the
Order, the Pensions_, (given to the Poor Knights) _might be paid and
receiv’d_, His Majesty’s further Pleasure being, _That all Grants and
Payments concerning the Order, should afterwards be confirmed under the
Seal of the Order only, and by Vertue thereof_.

AS to the Alms-Knights Patents, this Decree was of Force and Validity,
but in the other Generals, how far it was pursu’d we know not; for in
some of them it grew obsolete and useless. But in a Chapter called at
_Windsor_, the 22d of _April_, 10 _Car._ I. a Debate arose about
setting a Part of the Annual Summ of 1000 _l._ out of the Receipts of
his Majesty’s Exchequer, to be employ’d particularly in discharge of
Expences towards the Feasts of the Order, Legations to Foreign Princes,
Payment of the Officers Pensions, _&c._ disbursed for the Necessity and
Reputation of this Noble Order. Afterwards at a Chapter held the 18th
of _April_, 13 _Car._ I. that Sovereign ratify’d his Royal Assignation,
and increased his Bounty to 1200 _l._ _per Ann._ setling it for those
designs in a Perpetuity for ever, and making it payable out of the
Customs in the Port of _London_, but to be received by the Chancellor
of the Order for the time being, as Treasurer of this Money, of which
he was to give up an Account to the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
yearly at St. _George_’s Feast. And in pursuance of this Ratification,
the Attorney-General had Instructions to draw up a Book for his Royal
Signature to Warrant its passing under the Great Seal of _England_,
which was dispatch’d, the Letters-Patent bearing _teste_ at
_Westminster_, the 23d of _January_, 13 _Car._ I. Immediately after,
Sir _Thomas Rowe_, the Chancellor of the Order, presented a List of the
ordinary Fees and Charges of the Order, upon which it was agreed to,
_That there should issue out a standing Commission to the Chancellor
under the Great Seal of the Order to warrant the Yearly Payments, and
he to be discharged according as the said Patent had provided_. This
Commission passing the Great Seal the 3d of _May_, 14. _Car._ I. the
Sovereign thereby impower’d the Chancellor to make payable out of the
yearly Revenue of 1200 _l._ all and every the yearly Fees, Pensions,
Salaries, and other Payments due and payable to the Officers of the
Order, Alms-Knights, or others, appertaining to the Order, either by
Charter, Grant, or Assignation under the Seal and Signet of the Order,
or by any other Lawful way whatsoever, and in particular,

                                    _l._ _s._

    {Himself as Chancellor         100 0}
    {Register of the Order          50 0}
 To {Garter Principal King of Arms  50 0} _per Ann._
    {Usher of the Black-Rod         30 0}
    {Thirteen Alms-Knights         237 5}
                                  -------
                             Total 467 5
                                  -------

AND Sir _Thomas Rowe_, and in his Absence beyond Sea, Sir _James
Palmer_, Deputy-Chancellor receiv’d out of the Sovereigns Receipts of
Subsidies, Customs and Imposts, the 1200 _l._ _per Ann._ out of which
they paid the Annual Pensions above-named, under the Title of _certain_
and _ordinary Charges_, as also such as come within the Denomination of
Accidental and Extraordinary Expences; of which kind in their time,
were,


_Mantles, when the Sovereigns pleas’d to bestow them on the
Knights-Companions._

_Plate for the Altar in St._ George’_s_ Chappel _at_ Windsor.

_Embroidery of the Purse for holding the Seals._

_Removal of Atchievements and Plates against Installations._

_Escutcheons set up at St._ George’_s_ Feast.

_Privy Seals and Fees disburst for receiving the_ 1200 _l._ per Annum.

_Fees for Installation of Foreign Princes and Stranger-Knights._

_Parchment used in Dispensations and Prorogations._

_Blue Wax for the Seals of the Order._


BY which we are easily inform’d, what ought to be accounted
extraordinary Expences, towards the Discharge whereof this Sum was to
be employ’d as far as it would reach, to mitigate the Cost the great
Wardrobe formerly stood taxed with, Provisions of the Order, both for
foreign Embassies and Expences at Home.

THE Manner of the Chancellor’s passing his Account, as directed by the
said Commission, was thus done by Sir _James Palmer_, He humbly moved
the Sovereign in Chapter held the 10th of _October_, 15 _Car._ I. That
it would please him to view the Disbursements made for the Expences of
the Order, which thereupon being Examined by the Knights in the
Sovereign’s Presence, the same were found agreeable to the Directions
of the Commission, and the Payments justify’d by the Acquittance of
every Officer to whom any Fee was due, no Payment having been made
without the Sovereign’s Hand first to Authorize it: All which being
seen and allow’d, the Account (wherein his Disbursements exceeded his
Receipts 37 _l._ 13 _s._ 10 _d._) was esteemed Equitable and Just, and
passed by the Subscription of _Charles_ then Prince of _Wales_, the
Earls of _Pembroke_ and _Montgomery_, _Salisbury_, _Holland_,
_Berk-shire_, Duke _Hamilton_, and the Earl of _Northumberland_.


§. 7. THE Executions of these Offices is the last thing here to be
described: For tho’ all the Officers are strictly obliged to give
personal Attendance to their Offices; yet, in case of Sickness, Absence
out of the Kingdom, or other emergent Reasons, the Sovereign is pleased
to dispence with them, and constitute others to Officiate in their
stead, who on such Occasions wear the Robe of that Officer whom they
represent, so in case of Vacancy, the Absence of the Prelate at the
Grand Feast celebrated at _Windsor_, 31 _Hen._ VI. is noted in the
_Black Book_ to have been upon just Cause, and the Bishop of _Bangor_
officiated Divine Service, and next Morning celebrated the Mass _pro
defunctis_. The following Year, his Place in these religious Duties was
supply’d by the Bishop of _Salisbury_, as _Ann._ 36 and 37 _Hen._ VI.
and at all times of the Prelates absence, the Sovereign hath made known
his Will what Bishop should supply for him. The Office of Chancellor
hath been executed by Proxies, and to this may first be referred a
Passage in the _Black Book_, where Dr. _Taylor_ hath the Title of
_Vice-Chancellor_. Of later times, when Sir _Thomas Rowe_ was employ’d
in an Embassy into _Germany_, Sir _James Palmer_, Kt. (one of the
Gentlemen-Ushers of the Privy-Chamber) was deputed by the Sovereign to
the Chancellor-ship during his Absence, having the Purse with the Seals
deliver’d to him the 4th of _May_, 14 _Car._ I. being sworn by the
Register of the Order _durante deputatione & beneplacito Regis_, which
Clause was likewise annex’d in the Deputy _Chancellor_’s Oath, 12
_Car._ II. Upon Sir _Thomas Rowe_’s return, and indisposition, 16
_Car._ I. Sir _James_ was again deputed _Chancellor_, and a third time,
18 _Car._ I. continu’d Deputy _Chancellor_ unto the Death of Sir
_Thomas Rowe_, of which the Sovereign being inform’d at _Oxford_, 1644.
reserved the disposal of this Office ’till Sir _James_’s return to
Court, and then commanded him to wear the Badge and Ribband about his
Neck, ’till a Chapter of the _Order_ compleated his admittance.

IN the Vacancy of the Register-ship, _Ann._ 2 H. VIII. _Thomas Ruthall_
Bishop of _Durham_, supply’d it: And _Ann._ 18 and 19 _Eliz._ Dr.
_Day_, Dean of _Windsor_, executed the Office, and attended at the
Feasts of St. _George_, as Deputy-Register; Dr. _George Carew_ then
Register, having Licence by his Patent to execute it by himself or
Deputy, being dispenc’d with by the Queen in case of Sickness, or other
Impediment. After his Decease, Dean _Day_ was commanded to execute the
Office during its Vacancy (being 14 Years) which he effected ’till he
was advanced to the Bishoprick of _Winchester_, _An._ 38 _Eliz._ upon
which, Dr. _Robert Bennet_ (who succeeded him in his Deanry) was the
same Year admitted Register. Afterwards, Dr. _Beaumont_, being much
broken with Age, and other Diseases, Dr. _John King_, the junior Canon,
supplied his Place.

THE Office of Garter hath been supplied by Deputation: For in those
Embassies with the Ensigns of the Order to Foreign Princes, where
special Occasions detained Garter at home, some of the Kings or Heralds
of Arms, have been order’d upon those Employments, upon the
Recommendation of Garter to the Sovereign; whereof there are several
Instances; the last of _Gregory King_, Esq. _Lancaster_-Herald, who
lately carried over the Habit to the Elector of _Hanover_. So also in
case of Vacancy; for we find that _Clarencieux_, King of Arms, executed
this Office after Sir _Gilbert Dethick_’s Death, in _January_, 27
_Eliz._ being then sent with the Earl of _Darby_ to the _French_ King
_Henry_ III. As also in Reference to the Preparations the 15th of
_April_ following, and Service performed thereat, and at the Feast of
St. _George_ ensuing.

THE Constitution of the Office of Black-Rod admit of a Deputy to bear
the Rod before the Sovereign, where a lawful Occasion impedes his
personal Service. And Sir _Peter Young_, (Chief Gentleman-Usher,)
performed this Office at the Feast of St. _George_ held at _Windsor_,
_Ann._ 6 _Car._ I. _James Maxwell_, Esq. Black-Rod, was in _France_
upon the Sovereign’s Service; and after, being Mission’d by the King
into _Scotland_, _Peter Newton_, Esq; supplied his Place at the Feast
at _Windsor_, 8th, 9th, and 10th of _October_, _Anno_ 15 _Car._ I.




                               CHAP. IX.


§. 1. WE come now to treat of the Election of a Knight into the Order,
according to the Statutes of Institution, which Ordains, That
whensoever any Knight-Companion happens to depart this Life, _The
Sovereign (or his Deputy) after certain Notice had thereof, should
forthwith by his Letters, Summon all the Knights-Companions then within
the Realm (who were able to come) to meet him within Six Weeks after
such Notice, in what convenient Place soever he pleased to assign for
the Electing a new Companion into the Society_. Thus did the Law of
this Most Noble Order, in case of Death, and to prevent Vacancies, at
first provide; wherewith we evidently find the Practice of elder Times
did punctually concur: For as soon as Garter, in Discharge of his Duty,
had made Certificate to the Sovereign of a Knight-Companion’s Decease,
or otherwise to the Register of the Order, all fitting Diligence was
used to fill up the vacant Stall, within the Space limited by this
Statute, or immediately after, and for the quicker Dispatch, Letters of
Summons were issued to the Knights-Companions, to give personal
Attendance at the Election. In an ancient one upon the Death of Sir
_Henry Fitz Hugh_, Knight-Companion, _Temp. Henry_ V. these particulars
were no less pursuant to the Statutes, than worthy Observation.


“I. The Day whereon the defunct Knight-Companion died is therein set
down.

“II. Direction is given for celebrating Masses, according to the Tenor
of the Statutes.

“III. Intimation that a Stall is become void by the Knight’s Decease.

“IV. The Law of the Order vouched, which appoints an Election of
another Knight within six Weeks after Certificate made of the Death of
the former, to avoid as much as may be an interval in Succession.

“V. The Sovereign’s Power asserted where he sees Cause to Prorogue the
Election.

“VI. An Injunction to attend personally at the Election, under a
Penalty express’d in the Statutes.

“VII. The Day, Place, and Hour for Appearance is with certainty
appointed, to the End all might Accommodate themselves to be present.

“VIII. The End of coming is mention’d with full Disposition and
Preparation _to perform what the Statutes in this Case requir’d_.

“IX. Lastly, Direction is there given to the Knight summoned, that in
case his coming to the Chapter was impeded, he should certifie the
Reason of his Default against the time of his Appearance, of the
Validity whereof the Sovereign was to be sole Umpire.”


AND generally of these Topicks, and to this Purport were the Letters of
Summons in succeeding times composed.

THE before-mention’d Branch of the Statutes of Institution hath been
sufficiently enforced by Incorporating it into the Statutes, _temp. H._
V. and _H._ VIII. nor hath it since undergone any Alteration; howbeit
some further Addition and Explanation were annexed to them, 21 _Jac._
I. at a Chapter held at _Windsor_ the 24th of _April_ that year, where
it was decreed, _That the Sovereign being advertised of the Death of a
Knight-Companion, the Knights-Companions remaining at Court should move
him to declare his Pleasure whether he would that Letters should be
sent to all the Knights-Companions within the Realm to attend his
Person for the Choice of a new Knight, at a Day by the said Sovereign
appointed, according to the ancient Statutes of the Order, or be
pleas’d to defer the Election until the Feast of St._ George, _at what
time Elections have been most usually made; and according as he
resolv’d in what Place it should be, so it ought_ (by Letters directed
to the Knights-Companions within the Realm) _to be made known unto
them_.

This Deferring, or Prorogation of the Election, was no new thing, tho’
not indulged by the Statutes, or declared Law, before this 21 _Jac._ I.
as is evident by the Letter of Summons sent after the Death of Sir
_Robert D’Umfrevil_, Knight Companion, _temp. H._ 4. wherein Notice is
taken of the Limitation given by the Statutes, after Certificate of
Death, _viz._ Six Weeks, within the Space whereof a new Election was to
commence; yet where a Chapter for Election could not conveniently be
summoned within that limited Time, it was sufficient if the Soveraign
declared as he did in the said Placart and entered in the Black Book,
_That being then involved in other Business, he could not well attend
this Affair, and therefore deferr’d the time for Election, unto the Eve
of St._ George _next following_.

But of later Date, this formal Way of Summons by Letter, hath been
discontinued, and only remained to such as are remote, and warned only
by a verbal Message. For the Chancellor of the Order having consulted
the Soveraign’s Pleasure, as to the Day and Place, usually acquaints
Garter therewith, who thereupon goes immediately to the Knights
Companions then at Court, and desires their Attendance at the Chapter,
according to the Soveraign’s Designation.

And here it is to be remarked, that no Knight Elect ought to be
summoned to a Chapter of Election, or are rendered sufficient of giving
their Votes therein, until they be compleatly installed, either in
Person, or by Proxy. Nor indeed did any Necessity intervene, or require
it till the late rebellious times, when the Castle of _Windsor_ being
Garrison’d by the Parliament’s Forces, it was not possible for the Duke
of _York_ and Prince _Rupert_, to take Possession of their Stalls, as
the Law of the Order enjoined. Therefore the then Soveraign, whose
Right it is, did, 17 _Jan._ 1644, dispense with their Installations in
St. _George_’s Chapel, for the present, and invested them with the
Privileges of the Order, among which the Power of voting in Chapter,
was one: Provided those Princes should first take the Oath given at
Installations, and afterwards perform the accustomed Ceremonies, so
soon as it should be thought convenient, and the Castle was restored to
the Possession of his Majesty. In compliance to which Proviso they both
then took the Oath, and on the Eve of the first Feast of St. _George_
after the Restoration, the Duke was installed; and on the Eve of the
second Feast, 15 _Car._ 2. by the Earls of _Northumberland_ and
_Berk-shire_; and the Prince by the Duke of _Albemarle_ and Earl of
_Lindsey_.


§. 2. _The Place of Election._] BUT at what time soever the Ceremony of
Election is purposed, the same ought to be Celebrated in Chapter, (for
so is the Assembly of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions call’d,
where or whensoever conven’d) whether at the Solemnity of St.
_George_’s Feast, the ordinary or most accustom’d Time, or on other
Days specially set apart by the Sovereign; and when the Sovereign
thinks fitting in the Interval of Feasts, to elect any Foreign Prince
or other Person, Stranger or Subject, he often transacts it in peculiar
Chapters called to that purpose, and then appoints both Day and Place,
having that Prerogative. Some few Examples both of pristine, and of
late Time, make it manifest and apparent.

     Place.                Day and Year.      Knights elected.

                                            { _Alb. de Vasques Dalmadea_,
  1. Sign of the _Lion_  } _July_ 11.       {   E. of _Averentia_.
     in _Brentford_      } 24 _H._ 6.       { Lord _Beauchamp_.
                                            { Lord _Hoo_.

  2. Sov. Bed-Chamber    } _Nov._ 27.       { Sir _Francis Surreyne_.
     at _Westminster_    } 25 _H._ 6.       {

                                            { _Richard_ E. of _Warwick_.
  3. _London_, within    } _Feb._ 8th       { Lord _Bonvile_.
     the Bishops Palace. } 39 _H._ 6.       { Sir _Thomas Kyriel_.
                                            { Sir _John Wenlock_.

  4. Tower of _London_.  } _August_ 8.      { _G. Ubaldus_, D. of _Urbin_.
                         } 14 _Ed._ 4.      { _H. Percy_, E. of _North._

                         }                  { _Edward_ Pr. of _Wales_.
  5. Star-Chamber.       } _May_ 15th.      { _Richard_ Duke of _York_.
                         } 15 _Ed._ 4.      { _T. Grey_, Mar. of _Dorset_.

  6. Sovereign’s         } _Febr._ 10.      { _Ferdinand_, K. of _Spain_.
     Bed-Chamber in the  } 19 _E._ 4.       { _Hercules_, D. of _Ferrara_.
     Wardrobe, _London_. }                  {

  7. _Greenwich_,    _July_ 14. 15 _H._ 8.  Lord _Ferrers_.

  8. _Calais._           } _Oct._ 27th.     { _A. Montmor._ E. _Beamon._
                         } 24 _H._ 8.       { _P. Chabot_, E. of _Newbl._

  9. _Hampton-Court._    } _Jan._ 9th.      { _Edward Seymour_, Earl
                         } 32 _H._ 8.       {   of _Hertford_.

 10. _Windsor._          } _Aug._ 6. 1 _&_  { _Emanuel_ Duke of _Savoy_.
                         } 2 _Ph._ & _Mar._ {

 11. _Whitehall._        } _Feb._ 8th.      { _John Casimire_, Count
                         } 20 _Eliz._       {   Palatine of the _Rhine_.

 12. _York._      _Sept._ 12. 16 _Car._ I.  _Thomas_ Earl of _Strafford_.

BUT for the most Part since the Beginning of Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign,
_Whitehall_, the Sovereign’s almost constant Court and Abode, hath been
the usual Place whereunto all the Knights Companions have been
specially Summon’d, and peculiar Chapters assembl’d for Election in the
Intervals between the Vacancy and St. _George_’s Feast. However, while
King _Charles_ II. was in Exile, and wanted the compleat Number of
Knights to constitute a full Chapter, he was necessitated not only to
dispence with the Ceremony of Election in Chapter, but also in
supplying the Defect of a Scrutiny, by making his own Election; yet
after his Restoration, _Whitehall_ recover’d her wonted Honour, and
_April_ the 1st. 13 _Car._ II. at a Chapter call’d and held in the
_Bed-Chamber_ there, the Duke of _Richmond_, the Earls of _Lindsey_,
_Manchester_, and _Strafford_ were elected.


§. 3. IN the next Place we are to consider what Number of
Knights-Companions ought to be assembl’d to make up a compleat Chapter
of Election.

BY the Statutes, there should be Six in Number at the least, besides
the Sovereign or his Deputy; the due observance of which hath been so
strict formerly, that Elections have been deferr’d where Chapters have
been deficient in that Number; for Proof of which, the Duke of
_Gloucester_, _Ann._ 9 _Hen._ VI. then Deputy to the Sovereign (at that
Time in _France_) for Celebrating the Feast of St. _George_ at
_Windsor_, forbore to proceed to Election, _because the Number of
Knights-Companions there assembled was less than the Statutes
requir’d_. And _Ann._ 10 _Hen._ V. no Election was Solemniz’d, tho’ one
Stall was void by the Death of the Lord _Clifford_, and probably for
that reason; for the Earl of _Bedford_, then the Sovereign’s Deputy,
had but three Knights present with him, _Ann._ 22, or rather 23.
_Humphry_ Duke of _Bucks_ being deputed to celebrate the Feast of St.
_George_ at _Windsor_, altho’ there was at that Time four Stalls
vacant, yet did no Nomination pass; one reason, _because there was not
present a sufficient Number to compleat the Election_. So when the same
King celebrated the Grand Feast personally at _Windsor_, _Anno_ 31.
_Regni sui_, having but three Knights attending him thereat, the
Election was Prorogu’d for the very same Reason; in like manner 32, 33
and 34 _Hen._ VI. the Elections were retarded, for at the first of them
there were present but two Knights-Companions, besides the Sovereign’s
Deputy; and at the Two last but four, besides the Sovereign, tho’ the
_Registrum Cartaceum_, _Ann._ 33. names five by adding the Duke of
_Somerset_. At the Feast of St. _George_ celebrated at _Windsor_, _A.
D._ 1471. _Temp. Edw._ IV. the Sovereign fully resolving to Constitute
an Election, and having but five Knights-Companions present, _Calys_,
Pursuivant at Arms, was dispatch’d to _London_ for Sir _John Astley_ to
repair thither and compleat the Chapter, rather than violate the Laws
of the Order. _January_ the 31st. 21 _Car._ II. being design’d for the
Election of _Christopher_ Duke of _Albemarle_, and there being Conven’d
but five Knights at the Chapter, the Election was put off ’till the
Third of _February_ following, at which Time a proportionable Number of
Knights being present, his Election receiv’d their Approbation.


§. 4. YET in cases of Necessity only, and to illustrate the Power and
Prerogative of the Sovereigns, where the Exigency requires it, tho’ not
to be made use of where there is a possibility to perform the Rules and
Injunctions of the Statutes, the Sovereigns for divers Reasons, have
been induced to dispence with this Branch of the Statute for want of a
plenary Number to compleat a Chapter. And the first Liberty observ’d
herein, was made use of by King _Henry_ VIII. _Ann._ 26. _Regni sui_,
who upon the Death of the Lord _Montjoy_, very speedily assembl’d a
Chapter at _Whitehall_, where no more than five Knights-Companions
being present, the Absence of the rest were excus’d by special Grace
and Favour, and the _Injunction of the Statute_ (as the _Annals_
subjoin) _concerning the Number of Nominators_, were by the same
Clemency dispenc’d with, because of the Exigency of the Time and Place,
and immediately upon taking a Scrutiny, _James_ V. King of _Scotland_
was elected into the Fellowship of this illustrious Order, but from
that Time to the Rebellion, there occurs not any thing of this Nature;
but the Wickedness of those Days created new Exigencies and
Projections, which occasion’d, or rather inforc’d the Sovereign, King
_Charles_ I, most unwillingly to awaken and rouse up this dormant
Prerogative, which he put in Execution at a Chapter purposely assembl’d
for the Election of _Thomas_ Earl of _Strafford_, held at the City of
_York_ the 12th of _September_, 16 _Car._ I. where at that Time and
Place he dispenc’d with the Defect of Number of Six Knights-Companions,
having then with him Four only, some of the rest being engag’d in his
Service against the _Scots_.

AFTERWARDS when several of the Knights-Companions so much adhered to
the _Long Parliament_, that all Summons were ineffectual to draw them
to their Attendance upon their Sovereign, tho’ but to celebrate the
Grand Festival of their Patron (much less to the compleating Chapters
of Election) to which they were obliged by the Oath taken at their
Installment, the Sovereign was constrain’d to extend further his
Supreme Authority; and thereupon at the Feast of St. _George_,
celebrated at _York_, the 18th, 19th and 20th of _April, Ann._ 18.
_Regni sui_, in a Chapter held on the Eve of the said Feast by himself
and but four other Knights Companions, It was Order’d, _That Letters of
Dispensation should be drawn up for the insufficient Number_ (as
wanting Six Knights) _to hold a Chapter of Election, and for
Authorizing the Knights then present to deliver in their Votes
according to Custom in other Scrutinies, that so the Sovereign might
proceed to the Election design’d_. By vertue of which Dispensation, the
Duke of _York_ and Prince _Rupert_ were elected Fellows of this noble
Society.

THE like Dispensation was made at _Oxford_ upon the 2d of _March, Anno_
20. _Car._ I. there being but five Knights-Companions present with the
Sovereign; at which Chapter, _William_ Prince of _Orange_, and _Bernard
de Foix_, Duke of _Espernon_, were elected.

LAST of all, in reference to the holding three several Chapters
preparatory to the Feast of St. _George_, and grand Installation
celebrated at _Windsor_ the 15th, 16th, and 17th of _April_, 13. _Car._
II (one of which Chapters was held for the Election of Four Knights,
and to deliberate with the surviving Knights-Companions) the Sovereign
was pleas’d the 29th of _March_ preceeding, to pass the like
Dispensation under the Signet of the Order, and his own Sign Manual,
for this defect; and thereby made those three Chapters as legal as if
the Number of Knights-Companions had been compleat.


§. 5. WE are now arriv’d at opening the Chapter, whereinto neither the
Sovereign, nor any of the Knights-Companions are to be admitted without
the Ornament, both their Mantles and Garters, as the Statutes ordain,
and the Law is still in force, tho’ the Chapter hath been assembl’d
elsewhere than at _Windsor_. As for instance, one call’d at _Whitehall_
for the Election of _John_ Count Palatine of the _Rhine_, _Anno_ 20.
_Eliz._ the Earl of _Huntingdon_, and the Lord _Grey_ of _Wilton_, not
having their Mantles then at Court, were not permitted to enter into
the Chapter to give their Votes.

KING _Charles_ I. determining to call a Chapter for electing the
foresaid _Thomas_ Earl of _Strafford_ at _York_, where neither he nor
any of the Knights-Companions then attending his Person, had the Robes
of the Order with them; and taking into his Royal Consideration, the
Statutes now mention’d, did by his Authority, as Sovereign of the
Order, dispence with those Knights then present for coming into the
Chapter without their Mantles.

AFTERWARD, upon other Emergencies that ow’d their Origin to the late
Rebellion, the Sovereign did the like in some subsequent Chapters held
at _Oxford_.

AFTER the Restoration, a Dispensation passed the Signet of the Order,
dated the 10th of _January_, 12 _Car._ II. (the Great Seal being under
the Hand of the Graver but not finish’d) He was necessitated to make
use of his Supreme Authority for holding a Chapter the 14th of
_January_ following, in regard the Knights-Companions then in being
were not as yet provided of new Robes.

PRESUMING then, that a full Number of Knights, (in Obedience to their
Summons) are attending their Sovereign habited in their Mantles and
Garters, and entred into the Chapter-House at _Windsor_, or other Place
appointed for this Assembly, the Sovereign having taken his Seat at the
upper End of the Table, and given leave to the Knights-Companions to
sit, the Occasion of their being call’d together is first declar’d
either by the Sovereign himself, or the Chancellor of the Order by his
Command.

THE next thing in Course, is to exhibit to the Sovereign Information of
all the vacant Stalls; and if the Sovereign chance to be in Foreign
Parts, an Information ought to be transmitted to him by his Deputy or
Lieutenant; but if in _England_, and present in the Chapter, then to be
presented him by the Chancellor, or in his Absence by the Register, or
other Officer of the Order.

AFTER this they singly debate how the Place of the defunct Knight shall
be supply’d, and sometimes (where two or more Stalls are found void)
whether they shall be all fill’d up at that time, or if not, how many
Knights shall be elected _pro hac vice_.

BUT when the Scrutiny is intended to be taken in the Choir of St.
_George_’s Chapel at _Windsor_, these or the like particulars
(referring to Election) are commonly consider’d of on the Feast-Day in
the Chapter held immediately before Vespers, wherein it is most usually
order’d, That the Scrutiny shall be taken in the Chapel that following
Afternoon. And so it was decreed on St. _George_’s Day, _Anno_ 5.
_Edw._ VI. _viz._ _That the Elections of Knights should be taken that
Even-song in the Chapel_.

THIS being effected, the Chancellor begins to collect the
Knights-Companions Votes, and this is frequently term’d the taking the
Scrutiny: For the ampler View of the Nature of which Action and
Ceremony, we shall proceed to certain Considerations preparatory
thereunto, beginning with what concerns the Nomination of the Persons
to be proposed to the Election.


§. 6. AND first, That Knights-Companions only present in Chapter, have
the sole Right inherent in themselves, to nominate and propose Persons
to the Sovereign’s Election, consentaneous to the Bodies of the
Statutes, that even from the Institution of this Most Noble Order, it
hath not ever suffer’d any deviations.

IT is worthy of Remark, that _Anno_ 26. _Eliz._ the Feast of St.
_George_ being Celebrated at _Greenwich_, the Earl of _Warwick_, and
Lord _Burleigh_ were seized with a Fit of the Gout, upon the Feast Day,
which retarded them from Evening Prayer, whilst the Scrutiny was taken;
whereupon we find their Indisposition of Body, and Absence, noted in
that Scrutiny, where their Nominations should else have been set down,
had they been present. And upon the same Occasion was what _Robert
Cook_, Esq; _Clarenceux_, King at Arms, informs us, _That as for those
Knights Companions who happen to be absent_ when the Scrutiny is taken,
altho’ this Absence is _occasioned_ by Accident of Sickness, or with
the Soveraign’s Licence, nevertheless, _in regard of this their Absence
at that very time, their Votes may not be received_.

Those Knights Companions that come late to the Chapter, forfeit
likewise the Privilege of giving their Votes for that time, which so
happened to Prince _Rupert_, and the Earl of _Strafford_, at the
Chapter held for the Election of _James_ Duke of _Monmouth_, in the
Privy Chamber at _Whitehall_, 29 _Mar._ 1663.

Altho’ none of the absent Knights-Companions can give a Proxy to vote,
or otherwise send their Suffrages into the Chapter or Chapel, there to
pass in Nomination; yet formerly, _circa temp. H._ 5. _& H._ 6. when
divers of the Knights Companions were frequently employed in the Wars
of _France_, and consequently so fixed to their Commands, that they
could not personally attend the Feast of St. _George_ at _Windsor_, it
was usual for the Commander there in Chief, with Consent of those
Knights Companions, to make a formal Certificate, or Presentment (but
not to pass it by way of Nomination or Vote, for that the Law of the
Order did not permit) to the Soveraign, or his Lieutenant and Knights
Companions assembled at the Feast, of such Persons famous for martial
Valour and Virtue, with an Account of their gallant Acts and
Atchievements, (attested by other Persons of Honour) as were at that
time, and in that Kingdom, in the Sovereign’s Service, and seemed
worthy Candidates for the Honour of the Election, to the intent
victorious and brave Persons might be preferr’d to so noble and sublime
a Post; an Example whereof we find preserved by the Industrious and
Learned _Dugdale_.


“My Lord the Duc of _Bedford_ remembreth, as by the Statutes of the
Order of the Gartre, the Election of the Stalls voyde. He saith in the
Voyc of the Brethren, and of the Fellowship, beyng at the tyme of the
Fest, in the Presence of the Soverain or hys Deputy; that thinkyth to
my said Lord, that for hys Acquital to Knighthood, that fytteth hym to
give in Knowledge to the Kyng Soverain of the Ordre, and to his
Fellowship of the same Ordre, the great Honours of the notable Knights,
that from tyme to tyme exercyseth, and have exercysed in Knighthood;
and especially in the Service of their Soverain Lord. And of such
notable Knyghts as my Lord of _Bedford_, for the tyme remembreth him
of, he hath by the Advyce of them of the Fellowship of the Ordre, being
now in _France_, in the Kyngs Service, and givyng in charge to the said
Garter Kyng of Arms, of the Ordre, to shew theyr Names to the Kyng, and
to expound Part of theyr Deeds, Acts, and of theyr Worthyness. First to
expose the Honour of Sir _John Radeclyff_ that hath contynowed all the
tyme of the victorious Kyng that last dyed, whom Christe absolve, at
the first landing of hym, at _Quies de Caux_, where the sayd
_Radeclyff_ receyved the Order of a Knyght, and after contynowed the
Siege of _Hareflew_. And after with my Lord of _Excester_ at the
Battaile of _Vallemont_, and of _Quies de Caux_. And also sithen the
deth of the sayd victorious Kyng, _Radeclyff_ being Seneschall of
_Guyen_, hath brought by hys Labour in Knyghthood to hys Soveraign
Lord’s obeysance within the Duchie of _Guyen_ many dyverse Cities,
Towns and Fortresses. And in especial deserved great and notable merits
at the Siege of the City of _Bazates_, whych Siege was accorded,
appointed, and set day of Battaile and of Rescous, the whych day was
kept and houlden with great power on both Sydes, and under Banners
displayed, the Enemyes doubtyng to fyght wyth _Radeclyff_ required hym
of apoyntment they to depart under saufe conduct from the said Field,
the whych saufe conduct he graunted them for the term of eight days,
like as they required the honour and empruse rested in the said
_Radeclyff_, and to hys hygh meryte, for incontynent followyng was
delyvered to hym, the reddyssion and possession of the sayd Cytty of
_Bazates_. And also the sayd _Radeclyff_ was at the Battaile of
_Assincouert_, and hath contynowed and exercysed the Armys the Space of
xxviij Wynters unreproched. And in the tyme of his Esquierhood was at
the Battaile of _Shrewsbury_ and at the Journey of _Husks_ wyth the
Lord _Grey_ at the discomfiture and taking of _Owenson_.

                        Syr _Thomas Ramston_,
                        Syr _Rauff Butler_,
                        Syr _William Oldegall_,
                        Syr _Robert Harlyng_,
                        Syr _Gilbert Halsall_.

“_Item_, My Lord the Duc of _Bedford_ beseecheth the Kyng Soveraign of
the Order to have also for recommendyd to his good grace and highnesse
other of his Subjects and Servants now being in hys Service in the
Realme of _France_, whych hath done and yet doth take great payne by
their knyghtly labour dayly to serve the merite of worthyness and
prowess, as Syr _Robert Hungerford_, Syr _Thomas Beamont_, Syr _John
Popeham_, Syr _Nicholas Burdet_, Syr _Rauff Nevill_, Syr _Edward
Wyver_, Syr John_ Robesart_, Syr _Tyre Robesart_, Syr _William
Bretton_, Syr _Thomas Kyngston_, Syr _Richard Hankford_, and dyverse
other.”


BUT lest it may be suppos’d by some, that the Knights-Companions
present in Chapter, can at their pleasures nominate or propose to
elect such Persons as they deem meet, so they be qualify’d according
to the Statutes, this Privilege is to be understood of Knights
Subjects only: For in all Cases concerning Strangers, the Sovereign
doth but barely grant them Sufferance, and may direct and confine the
Knights-Companions to the Nomination of such as he at any time
intends to Honour with Election, which Prerogative was particularly
Asserted, 31 _Eliz._ and 3 _Car._ I.

IN the First of these Instances, the _Blue Book_, of the Order
recordeth, That at a Chapter held immediately before Vespers on St.
_George_’s Day, the Earl of _Huntingdon_, then Lieutenant for the
Sovereign, made known to the Knights-Companions, _That the Sovereign
did permit them, or leave it to their Pleasure to chuse into the Order
whatsoever Foreign Prince they should by their Votes approve of_.

HERE we have two Points that offer themselves to our Consideration.
_First_, That the Knights-Companions have not the Liberty to nominate
what Foreign Prince they please, but the same is derivative from the
Sovereign, and only by his Permission. _Secondly_, To weigh the
Paragraph well, that _Nominare_ ought to be render’d or understood here
by the Word _Eligere_, and that the Power delegated to the
Knights-Companions from the Sovereign, was only to nominate, not elect;
For it immediately follows, _That the Knights-Companions went from the
Chapter to the Second Vespers; and while the Divine Offices were
celebrating, the Prelate receiv’d their Nominations, and that very
Evening the Lieutenant presented them to the Sovereign for her to
consider of_; which had been insignificant and useless, if the
Knights-Companions had been impower’d by her Licence to have made the
Choice themselves. But the contrary is evident; for the next Morning,
all the Knights-Companions attending the Sovereign in Chapter, she
herself confirm’d there the Election not of any Foreign Prince, but of
the Earl of _Sussex_, and the Lord _Buckhurst_.

IN the other Instance, _Anno_ 3 _Car._ I. the Sovereign in a Chapter
held before Vespers on St. _George_’s Day, signify’d it to be his
Pleasure (Three Stalls being then vacant) that _out of Foreign Princes,
the Nomination of whom_, (saith the Annals in that very Place) _belongs
only to the Sovereign_, i. e. The Sovereign has the Prerogative to
direct the Knights-Companions to name, or impose upon them the
Nomination of such Foreign Prince he pleaseth they, the
Knights-Companions, should pitch upon; which must undoubtedly be
understood to Nominate, or enter down into the Scrutiny, (not elect)
_Gustavus Adolphus_, King of _Sweden_, and _Henry_ Prince of _Orange_.
For a little after, it is evident, when the Scrutiny was presented to
the Sovereign, that himself, not the Knights-Companions, made Election
of them.

AND it is further manifest, by the Scrutiny there inserted, that both
those Princes were named by every of the Knights-Companions then
present, according to the Sovereign’s signification (which has been
usually done at all other Times upon the like Occasions.) But
concerning the third Person then to be Elected, the Sovereign,
(intending him to be a Knight-Subject) left it entirely to their
Pleasure to Nominate whomsoever they thought worthy of their Votes.
Since this Time, the Nominations in like Cases, have been
sufficiently acknowledg’d by the Knights-Companions themselves, to be
a Prerogative belonging solely to the Sovereign. For to the End they
might more expeditiously and clearly shew their Compliance, it was
moved in a Chapter held at _Oxford_, _March_ the 2d. 19 _Car._ I.
_That it might become a Custom for the Sovereign to declare
before-hand, whether he would elect any Foreign Prince, and whom,
that so the Knights-Companions might be there to name him in the
Scrutiny_.


§. 7. ANOTHER Consideration in our Progress towards the Act of
Election, is appertaining to the Number, Qualifications and Dignities
of the Persons nominated, which may be more conspicuously resolved from
another Branch of the before-mention’d Article, _viz._ That every one
of the Knights-Companions present at the Election should nominate for
himself nine very sufficient Persons, whom he should judge free from
all Reproach and Scandal, whether Subjects to the Sovereign, or
Foreigners, Provided they are known not to Favour or Abet any Party at
enmity with him; that is to say, three Earls, or others of higher
Degree, three Barons, and three Knights. Wherein the Things chiefly
observable, we rank under five Heads.

For the First of these, their Number. Every Knight-Companion assembl’d
in Chapter, is injoin’d to name Nine, neither more nor less. So also
saith King _Henry_ V’s Statutes. Nor are King _Henry_ VIIIth’s. any
ways dissonant. And in this particular, the Statutes have been hitherto
inviolably observed, except in one Case. As to Numbers, and the
Mysteries wrapt up in them, we shall not further insist upon. But why
our Royal Founder selected this particular Number above all other,
unless he had some Eye, and tacit Reflection on the Nine Worthies, or a
treble threefold Cord and Symbol of perfect Stability and solid Amity,
the Number Nine is accounted to signifie, can with no great Facility or
Certainty be decypher’d.

As to the Second Point, they ought to be of unspotted Character. The
Injunction in the Statutes of Institution takes Order, that the Persons
designed for Election, should be _free from all Reproach, and of
untaintted Reputation_; and according to those of King _Henry_ V. are
to be _the best and most sufficient Knights, and freest from Reproach_.
To the same purpose the Exemplar in the Black-Book, _Such as are
fittest_, and whom they who Nominate _believe to be free from Ignominy
and Dishonour_. And to this Act of Nomination belongs part of the
Second Article in _Henry_ VIIIth’s Statutes, _That no Knight-Companion
should name any Person whom he thinks or esteems in his Conscience to
have upon him any Spot of Reproach_. But on the Contrary in another
Place of the same Statutes it is Provided, That they be nominated and
proposed _out of the Number of the most worthy and select Knights_.

How tender the Knights-Companions were in pristine Times of infringing
this particular, is proved from a notable Passage which happen’d _Ann._
39 _Hen._ VI. at a Scrutiny taken the 8th of _February_, in the Bishop
of _London_’s Palace, where _John de Foix_ Earl of _Kendal_, a
_Gascoigner_ by birth, (which makes the Example more eminent, that a
Stranger should have so great Regard to the Honour of the Order) not
being acquainted with the Quality and Merit of Knights and Honourable
Persons amongst us so well and demonstrably as to nominate such whom he
was confident were irreprehensible, forbore to mention any Persons at
all. And certainly, seeing the Statutes put very considerable
Qualifications upon the Deputies and Proxies, made choice for the
Installation of Strangers (as elsewhere shown) much more Caution and
Regard ought to be used both in the Nomination and Election of Knights
into this radiant and illustrious Society.

THE third Head the Statutes render indifferently capable of being
nominated or elected, either Knights Subjects, or Strangers, [Free
Princes or their Subjects.] And it was so even at the Election upon the
first Choice, where among the Twenty five Elected Knights, Twenty three
of them were Subjects. And this was the constant Custom not only in the
remaining Part of the Founders Reign, and during those of his three
Successors, but has continued ever since, as appears from the
Scrutinies taken and entred throughout the Annals of the Order.

OF those who have gain’d admission into this Noble Order by Election,
we shall in the last Chapter give an Account in a compleat Catalogue of
them, and likewise insert the Names of such as have missed their
Election, yet are not to be buried in Oblivion, out of this very
respect, that by their standing Candidates, have the Fame of being
enrolled in the Principal Register of Honour now in the Christian
World. It cannot be supposed we should give a List of all, (for that
were a Task too laborious, and wou’d prove too numerous) but only of
those of eminent Quality in foreign Parts, with the Æra when the
Scrutinies were taken.

  _A_ CATALOGUE _of some_ STRANGERS _who have been nominated, but not
    elected_.

 _Rambrith de Walsey_                          }
 _Johannes de Voynada_                         } 25 _Hen._ 6.

 _Franciscus Sforza_, Dux _Mediolani_            28 _Hen._ 6.

 _Franciscus_ secundus, Dux _Britanniæ_          13, 14, 15, 22 _E._ 4.

 _Henricus_ quartus, Rex _Legionis_ & _Castil._  14 _Ed._ 4.

 _Matthius Corvinus_, Rex _Hungariæ_             19, 22 _Ed._ 4.

 _Fredericus_ secundus, Dux _Austriæ_            22 _E._ 4. 1 _R._ 3.

 _Philippus_ quartus, Dux _Burgundiæ_            14 _Hen._ 7.

 _Franciscus Maria_, Dux _Urbini_                1, 2 _Hen._ 8.

 _Uladislaus_ secundus, Rex _Hungariæ_           1, 2, 6 _Hen._ 8.

 _Christianus_ secundus, Rex _Daniæ_             6, 8 _Hen._ 8.

 Dux _Barryæ_                                  }
 Comes _Galaciæ_                               } 8 _Hen._ 8

 _Alphonsus_ Dux _Ferrariæ_                      13, 15 _Hen._ 8.

 _Ludovicus_ secundus, Rex _Hungariæ_            13, 14, 15 _H._ 8.

 _Maximilianus Sforza_, Dux _Mediolani_          14, 15, 16 _H._ 8.

 _Marchio Pescaræ_                               17 _Hen._ 8.

 _Johannes_ tertius, Rex _Portugalliæ_           17, 18, 26, 28 _H._ 8.

 _—— Marchio Mantuæ_                              18 _Hen._ 8.

 _Carolus Burbonus_, Dux _Vandosme_              24 _Hen._ 8.

 _Gulielmus_ Dux _Clivensis_                   }
 —— Dux _Bavariæ_                               } 32 _Hen._ 8.

 Dux _Alvæ_                                    }
 Dux _Medinæ Cæli_                             } 1 & 2 _Ph._ and _M._
 Comes _Fereæ_                                 }

 _Franciscus_ secundus, Rex _Galliæ_

 _Franciscus_ tertius, Comes _Palatinus_

 _Augustus_ Dux _Saxoniæ_

 _Alphonsus_ secundus, Dux _Ferrariæ_

 —— Dux _Andegavensis_

 Dominus _Grabazenby_                          }
 Dominus _Humers_                              }
 Dominus _Johannes Mounte_                     } 24 _Hen._ 8.
 Dominus _Harmibolt_                           }
 Dominus _Boysy_                               }

THOSE Persons were render’d incapable of Nomination who were known to
Act in contrary Interest to the Sovereign; as the _Exemplar_ in the
_Black-Book_ expresseth more copiously, _Such as are not his
Adversaries, or Abettors, or willing Defenders of his Adversaries_.
Sometimes the Knights-Companions being more wary and discreet in
Nominating them, to put either disrespect upon the Sovereign, or offer
Violation to the Statutes.

IN the last Place, concerning the Degree, Rank and Dignity of the Nine
Knights proposed to be Elected, the Statutes of the Institution set
forth, That they be, _First_, Three _Earls_, or Persons of great
Dignity. _Secondly_, Three _Barons_. And, _Thirdly_, Three _Knights_:
Or, as it is in _Henry_ V’s Statutes, _Trois Contes ou de greegnear
estat, trois Banerets, & trois Batchelers_. These Degrees are to be
ranked in Three Classes, and they distinguish’d by Three Divisions, all
including the Three Degrees aforesaid.

WHEREAS all other Bodies and Exemplars of the Statutes make positive
mention of Earls only, yet the Statutes of _Hen._ VIII. in this Point
are more ample, by expressing the first Class, _Dukes_, _Marquesses_,
and _Earls_, or _Persons superior_ to these in Degree, wherein the
highest Dignity is comprehended.

WE may observe the different Title, _viz._ _Baneret_ that _Henry_ V’s
Statutes hath given us instead of _Baron_; and not only in this
Article, but in all other where there is Occasion to treat of Barons;
and yet the Record intends by it no other than the Person it mentions:
For tho’ a Banneret had its Denomination _à vexillo_, it usually
signify’d a Degree of Honour next below a Baron, both in a later and a
modern Date; yet formerly among our Records, it is expressedly
Synonymous to Baron, as is sufficiently clear’d up by our most Learned
_Selden_; and in this Sense is to be taken here, and not as a distinct
Title of lower Degree, because we observe the Bannerets rank’d in all
Scrutinies before King _Henry_ VIII. establish’d his Statutes (except
one) with the Knights-Batchelors, not with Barons.

THE Title of the third and lowest Rank in this Classis in the Statutes
of their Institution, are called _Milites Bachalauri_, and in those of
King _Henry_ V. _Batchelors_, and elsewhere _Bachalauri & Bachelauri
Equites_, which in common Acceptation are the same with _Milites_, tho’
thus render’d to evince their difference from Knights-Bannerets, who
are of a superior Degree of Honour. And here we may observe, that there
is no Place in a Scrutiny for any under the Degree of a
Knight-Batchelor. And tho’ Three of the Nine mentioned are set down to
be Barons, and Three other Earls, or of higher Degree, yet must these
Six be such as have had conferred on them the Order of Knighthood, else
their Names are rejected, and neither given or taken in Nomination; for
the Words of the Statute expresly are, _That each of the Knights
assembl’d at the Election shall name nine Knights_.

THUS King _Charles_ I. _Anno_ 6 _Regni sui_, designing to invest
_James_ Marquess of _Hamilton_ with this Order, conferr’d the Honour of
Knighthood upon him immediately before his Nomination: And the Annals
in that Place put this commentary Remark thereupon, _Because by the
Statutes it is provided, that none should be elected into the Order
that have not been dignify’d with the Title of Knight_.

YET the Ceremony of Knighting the Person designed to be elected, was
not so strictly regarded, but sometimes this Branch of the Statute was
either wholly passed, or else confounded with the second Article
throughout the several Bodies of the Statutes, which prohibits the
Choice or Election of any Person into the Society, as this doth the
Proposal or Nomination. And thereupon perhaps it was conceiv’d, that
altho’ the Nomination, Election, and sometimes Delivery of the Ensigns
of the Order was first dispatch’d and past, yet it was sufficient if
the Honour of Knighthood was conferr’d afterwards; as in the Cases of
_William_ Earl of _Derby_ and _Thomas_ Lord _Burleigh_, _Anno_ 43.
_Eliz._ where the Register observes, That as soon as their Election was
over, and they Usher’d into the Chapter, the Earl of _Derby_, (who it
seems had not been Knighted before) was dubbed Knight with a drawn
Sword, according to Custom, after which they had the Garter and George
put on by the Sovereign her self.

IN like manner, _Ulrick_ Duke of _Holstein_, and _Henry_ Earl of
_Northampton_, immediately after their Election, (the last Day of St.
_George_’s Feast, _Ann._ 3. _Jac._ I.) and before they receiv’d the
Ensigns of the Order, had the Dignity of Knighthood conferr’d on them
by the Sovereign; and in like manner the Earl of _Sussex_, _Ann._ 3
_C._ I. which the _Red-Book_ of the Order recites, _That as soon as it
was understood that the Earl had not receiv’d the Order of Knighthood
before, the Sovereign immediately drawing his Sword, Knighted him_;
which was not done till after his Election and Investiture with both
the George and Garter.

THUS did the Ceremony of Knighthood succeed the Election of _Charles_
Prince of _Wales_, the 21st of _May_, _Ann._ 14 _Car._ I. for after he
had been elected, and invested with the Ensigns of the Order by the two
Senior Knights (the Earls of _Pembroke_ and _Montgomery_, and of
_Arundel_ and _Surry_) were intreated by the rest of the
Knights-Companions, to present his Highness to the Sovereign in the
Name of all the rest, to be initiated a Knight-Batchelor. He was
conducted by the said Earls (his Supporters) into the Presence-Chamber
in _Windsor-Castle_, where before the Chair of State, he most Solemnly
receiv’d the Order of Knighthood from his Father King _Charles_ I.

TO Honour which Knighthood, and the Memory thereof, Four of the chief
Nobility then present were Knighted, _viz._ the Earls of _Essex_, _St.
Alban_’s and _Elgin_, and Viscount _Grandison_, being conducted from
the Great Chamber to the Sovereign’s State, each between two
Batchelor-Knights.

AFTERWARDS the Law in this Point began again to be more rightly
understood; and by that Time _James_ Duke of _York_ came to be elected
(which was the 20th of _April_, 18 _Car._ I. at the Feast of St.
_George_ celebrated at _York_) the Sovereign appointed, and accordingly
conferr’d Knighthood upon him the Day before, which he receiv’d upon
his Knees, being conducted into the Presence-Chamber between two of the
Nobility, who were also Knights, the Marquess of _Hertford_ and
Viscount _Grandison_. In Honour and Commemoration whereof, Four other
Noblemen receiv’d the Honour of Knighthood at that time, the Earl of
_Carnarvan_, the Lords _George D’Aubignie_, _John Stewart_, and
_Bernard Stewart_, each supported by two Knights.

AND thus Prince _Edward_ Count Palatine of the _Rhine_, and _George_
Duke of _Buckingham_, being designed by King _Charles_ II. to be
admitted into this Noble Order, were both first Knighted at St.
_Germains_ in _France_, 1649. and afterwards had the Ensigns of the
Order sent unto them, by the Hands of Sir _Edward Walker_, Kt. Garter,
who, in right of his Office, invested them therewith.

YET in the Case of Prince _Rupert_, who was elected with _James_ Duke
of York, _Ann._ 18. _Car._ I. His want of Knighthood became no
impediment, because he was a Prince in another Country, _viz._ Count
_Palatine_ of the _Rhine_, and Duke of _Bavaria_, and might therefore
justly challenge a Privilege to come within the Rule of foreign Princes.

BUT the Sovereign, to arrive as near to the Intention and Observance of
the Statute as he could, (where there was a possibility to do it, and
the Honour would be well accepted by the Prince) thought it requisite
by Commission under the Great Seal of _England_, to impower _Thomas_
Earl of _Arundel_ and _Surry_, and _George_ Lord _Goring_, both being
then in _Holland_, or either of them, to Knight the said Prince before
putting on the Garter (seeing it could not possibly be done before his
Election) which was intended to be sent by him by the Hands of Sir
_John Burrough_, Garter. But Death intervening, the Sovereign’s
Intention was frustrated; altho’ the Prince, upon his coming afterwards
into _England_, receiv’d both the Garter and the George from the
Sovereign himself at _Nottingham_ nevertheless without Knighthood,
which to excuse, it may well be alledg’d, that the Sovereign might not
recollect this Part of the Ceremony, it being a Time of so great
Turmoil and Fatigue, occasion’d by the then setting up of his Standard.

HOWEVER, upon the 17th of _January_, 1644. when a Decree past in
Chapter then assembl’d at _Oxford_, That both the Duke of _York_ and
the Prince, should enjoy all Emoluments and Privileges of the Order,
tho’ they were not as yet Install’d (which Ceremony was to be
compleated assoon as _Windsor_ was out of the Power of the Rebels.) The
Prince, before he receiv’d his Oath, was conducted by the Earl of
_Berk-shire_ and Duke of _Richmond_ and _Lenox_, unto the Sovereign,
and had conferr’d on him the Honour of Knighthood, there being at the
same Time two of the Nobility Knighted in Memorial of that Solemnity,
the Lord _Henry Seymour_, Second Son to the Marquess of _Hertford_, and
the Lord _Capell_, conducted each between two Knights.


§. 8. WE are now come to speak of the Scrutiny it self, in reference to
which, we shall consider by whom it ought, or hath been usually taken,
and the Manner and Form thereof.

BY the Statutes of the Institution, the Collecting the
Knights-Companions Votes, and entring them in the Scrutiny, solely
appertains to the Prelate of the Order; and upon him is this Office
devolved, not only by the other Bodies of the Statutes, but by the
Constitutions of his Post, and the Obligation of his Oath, whose right
we find duly asserted upon this Persons taking a Scrutiny, _Anno_ 29
_Eliz._

THE Statutes likewise provided, That if the Prelate was at any Time
absent, then the Dean of _Windsor_, or the Register, or the Senior
Residentiary of the College, or the Secretary, or Scribe of the Order,
should undertake the Employment; and elsewhere it is mention’d
expressly, _In the absence of the Prelate, whose particular Duty
otherwise it was_. And among the various Examples enroll’d in the
Annals of the Order, these Examples abundantly confirm it. The Prelate
of the Order collected the Suffrages from the Knights-Companions,
_Anno_ 9 _Hen._ V. when _John_ Earl-Marshal, and Four other Knights
were elected. The like did _Henry Beaufort_, Lord-Cardinal, Prelate of
the Order, upon the Election of _John_ King of _Portugal_, _Anno_ 13
_Hen._ VI. And when the Duke of _Suffolk_ was chose, _Anno_ 26 _Hen._
VI. the Prelate then also gather’d the Suffrages; which he likewise did
upon the Feasts of St. _George_, Celebrated in the 12th, 13th, 14th,
27th, 28th, 30th, 31th, 34th and 35th Years of Queen _Elizabeth_’s
Reign. Sometimes the Scrutinies have been gathered both by the Dean of
_Windsor_, and the Register of the Order jointly; as we find by the
Election of _John_ Lord _Talbot_, _Ann._ 2 _Hen._ VI. of Sir _John
Falstaff_, _Ann._ 6 _Hen._ VI. and the Duke of _Quinbery_, _Ann._ 5
_Hen._ VI. all receiv’d at the Feasts of St. _George_, celebrated at
_Windsor_.

IT is more than a bare Conjecture, that the Dean at those Times
receiv’d the Votes from the Knights-Companions on the Sovereign’s side,
while the Register collected those on the Prince’s; for ’tis observ’d,
that in King _Henry_ Vth’s Reign, in Posts of different Natures, one
whereof was to signifie the Sovereign’s Pleasure to the
Knights-Companions about their paying due Reverence, first to God, and
afterwards to himself; and the other in a Ceremonial, which directs the
Manner and Order of Mulcting the Knights-Companions; in both which, the
Dean perform’d the Service on the right Hand the Choir (the Sovereign’s
side) and the Register on the left.

SOMETIMES the Register of the Order took them alone, as at the Election
of _John_ Earl of _Arundel_, _Anno_ 10 _Hen._ VI. and those of the Earl
of _Morteyn_ and Sir _John Grey_, _Ann._ 14 _Hen._ VI. Moreover it’s
plain, that when the Office of Register was not fill’d, and _Thomas
Ruthall_, Bishop of _Duresme_, executed it during its Vacancy, the
Bishop himself, _Ann._ 2 _Hen._ VIII. collected the Suffrages. The like
did _William Day_, Dean of _Windsor_, in the Absence of _George Carew_,
Dean of the Chapel and Register of the Order, at the Feasts of St.
_George_ held at _Whitehall_, _Anno_ 18 and 19 _Eliz._

THIS Duty was executed by the Register from the 15th Year of King
_Henry_ VIII. to the Period of his and his Son’s Reign, as the
_Black-Book_ of the Order fully evinces; as also on St. _George_’s Day,
_Ann._ 1. _Eliz._ by _John Boxhall_; and at the Feast of St. _George_
held _Ann._ 1 _Jac._ I. by _Giles Thompson_, who in the several Times
were Registers, yet we must not mistake that what they officiated was
on their own behalf, but supply’d the Place of the Prelate.

IN the Beginning of Queen _Mary_’s Reign, we find the Chancellor of the
Order began to perform this Service, being by King _Henry_ VIIIth’s
Statutes adjoined to those other Offices before describ’d, to collect
the Scrutinies in absence of the Prelate, and thereby made capable of
the Employment, which afterwards is tacitly remark’d to be perform’d as
if in his own right, when the Register has only effected it in the
Chancellor’s absence, tho’ in reality it was no other, than as in the
Instance of the Bishop of _Duresme_ and Dr. _Day_ aforesaid, who took
the Scrutiny in the Vacancy of the Office, and absence of the Register.

_Anno_ 4 _Eliz._ the Register in the Absence of the Chancellor (who was
sick,) upon the Feast Day of St. _George_, collected the Suffrages. And
_Ann._ 8. _Eliz._ _George Carew_, then Register of the Order, _took the
Votes of the Knights-Companions in absence of Sir_ William Petre,
_Chancellor of the Order_. So also _Ann._ 4. _Jac._ I. where the Cause
of the Chancellor’s Absence is noted to be Sickness, and _Ann._ 6.
_Jac._ I. to be Death.

IN the first of these Instances, we find the Prelate expressly set down
to be there; in the two following, his presence is implyed, for it is
said, that the Four Officers of the Order did attend both Feasts,
whereof, (the Chancellor being wanting) the Prelate must needs be one.

NOW all these Passages seem to relate to the Right of the Chancellors
rather than the Prelates by this Remark, That every of the Scrutinies
were taken in the Absence of the Chancellor, which looks something like
a cautionary Remark that denoted the Right of Executing this Office to
the Chancellor, rather than the Prelate.

WHEN a Deputy-Chancellor hath been admitted to Officiate in the
Chancellor’s absence, he, and not the Prelate, hath taken the Scrutiny,
(tho’ present) as at the Election of _Charles_ Prince of _Wales_, the
20th of _May_, 14 _Car._ I. and at another taken the 22d of _May_
following, and the same when the Suffrages were collected for the
Election of the Duke of _York_ and Prince _Rupert_ at _York_, _Anno_ 17
_Car._ I.

BUT there is one Passage more (upon taking a Scrutiny _Anno_ 22 _Jac._
I.) which seems Advantageous to the Chancellor in this Point, where it
is said, _That when the Knights-Companions had given their Votes_ (as
say the _Annals_) _THE CHANCELLOR WHO, ACCORDING TO HIS OFFICE, was to
receive them, presented them to the Sovereign_. Howbeit, in truth there
is no sufficient Foundation for the Register to insert this as done by
the Chancellor, _by Virtue of his Office_, or any one Act or Chapter
that hath suspended or made void, the Right of the Prelate, which is
reserved by him, even by the Patent, for erecting the Office of
Chancellor; especially in those Affairs, which, respecting the Order,
ought by the Statute of the Institution to appertain to him. But since
the stated Time of performing this Ceremony in the Chapel, the Prelate
(if present) is presumed to be Officiating at the Altar, in discharge
of another part of his Duty, upon this consideration hath the Service
been then imposed upon the Chancellor, and others.

_Lastly_, WE find the Scrutiny to be once taken by Garter, _Ann._ 16.
_Car._ I. at the Election of _Thomas_ Earl of _Strafford_. But this was
at a Time, when not only the Prelate, but all the other Officers of the
Order, excepting Sir _John Burrough_, Garter, were absent, and
consequently this Service so executed, ought rather to be judged to
have been done in the Prelate’s than Chancellor’s Right.


§. 9. BUT whosoever gather’d the Suffrages, the Time when they enter’d
upon this Duty (in the Intervals of Feasts, where the Occasion requir’d
a peculiar Chapter for an Election) was usually after the Chapter had
been open’d, and the Matter of Election proposed by the Sovereign;
after which he proceeded with all possible Reverence and Respect.

HOWBEIT upon an extraordinary Occasion (in the Interval of the Grand
Feasts) the Sovereign hath sometimes called an Assembly of the Knights
Companions, to be convened at the Castle of _Windsor_, who in the
Choire of St. _George_’s Chapel (not Chapter-House) after the more
solemn Manner, have deliver’d in their Nominations, and returning
thence into the Chapter-House, he there continu’d the Election. Thus
did King _Henry_ VIII. upon the 7th of _June_ in the 17th Year of his
Reign, in reference to the Election of the Lord _Henry Fitz Roy_, (so
stil’d in the Scrutiny, and rank’d among the Barons; for as yet he was
not created Duke of _Somerset_ and _Richmond_) and _Ralph Nevil_, Earl
of _Westmorland_.

ON the 20th of _May_, _Anno_ 14 _Car._ I. being _Trinity-Sunday_, the
Sovereign caus’d a Chapter to be held that Afternoon in the
Chapter-House at _Windsor_, for the Nomination and Election of
_Charles_ Prince of _Wales_; at the Breaking up whereof, the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions proceeded immediately to St. _Georges_’s Chapel,
where at Evening-Prayer, (which was not within the Compass of the
Feast, for that began not ’till next Day) the Scrutiny was taken.

AND besides those Examples which shew the Nominations have been
collected (upon peculiar Occasions) in the Choire at _Windsor_, there
are one or two Instances they have been also taken in the Chapel at
_Whitehall_, as on the 15th of _May_, _Ann._ 1 _Car._ I. at the Choice
of _Edmund_ Earl of _Dorset_, _Henry_ Earl of _Holland_, and _Thomas_
Viscount _Andover_, as on the 4th of _July_ the same Year, whereat the
Duke of _Chevereux_ was pitch’d upon.

THE Suffrages have commonly been collected at the Second Vespers, or in
the Time of Evening-Prayer on St. _George_’s Day, or on that Day
whereon the Feast of St. _George_ hath been celebrated by Prorogation;
and with this Distinction of Time, the taking of divers Scrutinies are
mark’d.

HOWEVER, there occurs one Scrutiny gather’d in the Chapter-House at
_Windsor_ on the Eve of the Grand-Feast, at which the person
immediately elected, was sent for in, and had the Ensigns of the Order
conferr’d upon him, when immediately the Sovereign made his Progression
to the Chapel, and after some small Interval, the Elect proceeded to
his Installation. And this was the Case of _James_ Marquess _Hamilton_,
_Ann._ 6 _Car._ I. who lying under an Obligation to commence his Voyage
next Morning towards _Germany_ (whither he had the Commission of
General of 6000 Foot in Assistance of the King of _Sweden_) occasion’d
this his Sovereign’s Indulgence, and quick dispatch.

WHEN the Scrutiny first began to be collected in the Chapel, is treated
of somewhat general and indefinite. _Ann._ 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9 _Eliz._ it
was during the time of _Evening-Prayer_. And in like manner, _Ann._ 4
_Jac._ I. and 13 _Car._ I. And when the Feast of St. _George_ was
solemniz’d at _Whitehall_, the 18th of _April_, 13 _Car._ I. the
_Annals_ say, _That the Sovereign recreated himself with the Melody of
Evensong, during which the Chancellor collected the Votes of the
Knights-Companions_.

BUT in some other Places, the Time when this Matter was transacted is
restricted to a precise Time, or some particular Part of Evening
Prayer, as _Anno_ 26 and 27 _Eliz._ _whilst the Choire sung the
Service_, and the like _Anno_ 14 _Jac._ I. but 4 _Car._ I. _while the
Anthem was sung after the second Lesson_, but more frequently after the
first Lesson, as in the 2 and 9 _Car._ I. _while the Anthem was
singing_, or whilst they were hymning the Anthem of the blessed _Virgin
called the Magnificat_, and which is all one with that, _Anno_ 14
_Car._ I. viz. _assoon as the first Lesson was read_, or _at the first
Lesson_, which is remembred to be _the usual Part of the Service, in
which the nomination ought to begin_.


§. 10. THE manner of the Order the Knight-Companions Votes ought to be
collected when the _Scrutiny is taken in the Choire_, when the Register
informs us, upon the Celebration of St. _Georges_’s Feast at
_Greenwich_, 28 _Hen._ VIII. as entred into the Black Book; “That he
used his Diligence in going to and fro from one Side to the other, to
demand and redemand the Suffrages from the Knights-Companions,
according to the Variety and Disposition of their Stalls,” which same
Methods _in eisdem terminis_ the Chancellor observed, _Anno_ 24 _Eliz._
and without question was generally performed at other Seasons, for the
annals describe it to be perform’d _de more_ 5 Eliz. or _juxta Ordines
Constitutionis_ Anno 26 _Eliz._

THAT the Officer who collects the Scrutiny, is obliged to begin at the
youngest Knight-Companion, and so proceed upward towards the Eldest, is
evident from the Order mentioned to be in Vogue, _An._ 2 and 20 _Eliz._
as also 15 _Car._ I. But to give a more particular Account of this
Ceremony, as it stood _temp. Car._ I. and doubtless long before, tho’
not Recorded _in Scriptis_, is as follows.

_First_, THE Officer arose and went into the Middle of the Choire;
directly over against his own Seat, he made two Reverences, first
towards the high Altar, and next to the Sovereign, then he proceeded up
to the Choire near the _hault pace_ against the Stall of the junior
Knight-Companion, and there made like Reverence; this done he went up
to the Stall of the said junior Knight, and with a singular Reverence
to him, only demanded whom he pleased to nominate, which having taken,
(making to him a second Reverence,) he descended into the Choire, and
thence passed to the next senior Knight on the other Side, (unless by
reason of the vacancy of the Stall he Sits on the same Side with the
junior) and having received his nomination from the second
Knight-Companion, he again crossed the Choire to the Third, and in like
manner he ascended according to the Seniority of the Knights-Companions
present, (always crossing the Choire where there was occasion) until he
arrived at the senior Knight-Companion; and having thus received all
their Nominations, he returned into the Middle of the Choire, and after
accustomed Reverences, took his Seat.

THIS Method in collecting the Votes as to the general, and in the
Choire, ought likewise to be observed when they are taken from the
Knights-Companions in Chapter, they being ranked in due order on either
Side of the Table, according to the Seniority of their Elections and
situations of Stalls in the Choire; the Officer beginning with the
junior and thence gradually ascending to the senior Knight.

AND that we may rightly apprehend after what form every
Knight-Companion Ranketh the Names of those Persons he proposeth, and
how each Classis is distinguished and divided, the following Scrutiny
will manifest which was taken off, _May_, _Anno_ 13 _Hen._ VI. upon the
Vacancy of one Stall hapning by the death of Sir _Henry Tanke Clux_ a
_German_, and the first Scrutiny found Marshalled among the Annals of
this most noble Order.

                              NOMINABANT.

                   Principes.        Barones.          Equites.

 Dux             { Duc. _Norfolciæ_  Dom. _Lovell_     Dom. _S. Stanley_
 _Exoniæ_.       { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Audley_     Dom. _J. Holland_
                 { Com. _Oxoniæ_     Dom. _Dudley_     Dom. _J. Steward_

 Marc.           { Duc. _Norfolciæ_  Dom. _Lovell_     Dom. _J. Fengs_
 _Suffolc._      { Com. _Devoniæ_    Dom. _Audley_     D. _R. Woodvyle_
                 { Com. _Oxoniæ_     Dom. _Foix_.      Dom. _A. Ogard_

 Com.            { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Audley_     Dom. _R. Fengs_
 _Salopiæ_.      { Duc. _Norfolciæ_  Dom. _Dudley_     Dom. _T. Stanley_
                 { Com. _Oxoniæ_     Dom. _Foix_       Dom. _T. Kiriell_

 Dom.            { Duc. _Norfolciæ_  Dom. _Foix_       Dom. _R. Fengs_
 _Sudeley_.      { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Lovell_     Dom. _J. Fengs_
                 { Com. _Devoniæ_    Dom. _Audley_     Dom. _G. Bonevile_

 Dom.            { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Wells_      Dom. _T. Kiriell_
 _Willoughby_.   { Duc. _Norfolciæ_  Dom. _Lovell_     D. _J. Montgomery_
                 { Com. _Oxoniæ_     Dom. _Laware_     D. _R. Shotesbroke_

 Dom.            { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Foix_       D. _E. Hungerford_
 _Scales_.       { Com. _Oxoniæ_     Dom. _Clyfford_   D. _G. Beauchamp_
                 { Com. _Devoniæ_    Dom. _Laware_     Dom. _A. Ogard_

 Dom.            { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Boucer_     D. _R. Hungerford_
 _Johannes       { Duc. _Norfolciæ_  Dom. _Audley_     Dom. _R. Roos_.
 Falstaff_.      { Com. _Oxoniæ_     D. _Gray Ruffyn_  Dom. _A. Ogard_

 Dom.            { Duc. _Warwici_    Dom. _Foix_       Dom. _R. Fengs_
 _J. Beauchamp_. { Com. _Devoniæ_    Dom. _Lovell_     Dom. _J. Fengs_
                 { Com. _Oxoniæ_     Dom. _Audley_     Dom. _R. Roos_.

IN the first Column each Knight-Companion hath his own Name perfixt to
those Persons for whom he condescends his Vote, to the intent it may
appear by whom the Knights candidates are nominated, and these are
Ranked in three several Divisions.

THE first contains, The Degrees of Earls, Marquesses, Dukes, Princes,
Kings and Emperors; yet at a Scrutiny taken _Anno_ 24 _Hen._ VI. in a
Chapter held at _Brainford_, _Albro Vasquez d’almadea_, (who
immediately following, is Stiled _Comes Averentiæ_) is by a mistake
Ranked; but in the second Division among the Barons, and twice among
the Knights Votes of the Marquess of _Suffolk_, and Earl of
_Shrewsbury_, but this Error perhaps owes its original for want of due
knowledge, either of the Law in the Statutes or his Degree, the latter
of which is the most feasible to conjecture; for being a Stranger, his
Title might not be so generally divulged, nor is it taken notice of in
the Scrutiny itself, tho’ in the annals immediately after it was
rectified.

AND to shew the probability of this Point, the Earls of _Oxford_,
_Devonshire_, and _Arundel_, (whose degrees were sufficiently known) at
a Scrutiny taken _Anno_ 24 _Hen._ VI. are ranked in the second Division
among the Barons, and _Anno_ 1 _Hen._ VIII. the Earl of _Darby_ is
three Times so placed, and again 13 _Hen._ VI. the Earl of _Devonshire_
twice; but this happened not thro oversight or neglect of the Statutes,
but because at these Nominations wherein they are so Ranked, the first
Division to which they appertained, happened to be fill’d up with those
other higher Dignities belonging to the same Class, _viz._ Kings or
Dukes, as when the beforementioned Earls of _Oxford_, _Devonshire_, and
_Arundel_, were set down in the Place of Barons; the King of
_Portugal_, the Dukes of _Warwick_ and _Norfolk_, were put in the Class
of Princes, and so it happened in many other instances.

ON the contrary, _Anno_ 15 and 16 _Edw._ IV. the Lord _Rich. Grey_ one
of the Queen’s Sons, by her former Husband, Sir _John Grey_ of _Groby_
Knight; in respect of his Alliance to the Royal Family, is Ranked in
the first Division among the Princes, under the Title _Dominus
Richardus filius Reginæ_, and afterwards _Anno_ 19 _Edw._ IV. set only
among the Barons, as well with the former Title as this _Richardus
Dominus Grey_, but _Anno_ 22 _Edw._ IV. he is thrice register’d among
the Princes, and as often with the Barons, whence it is observable that
to be Enrolled in the Rank of Princes, may be afforded of courtesie to
Persons of high Eminency and Blood; but then as they can lay no claim
to it by their Merit, so such of the Knights-Companions as Rank them
lower, suffer no diminution in their Honour.

WHEREIN the second Division are Ranked the Barons and Viscounts, for
Viscounts in all Scrutinies, after the first Erection of that Dignity,
were on the same level with the Barons, until the 3 of _Jac._ I.
(excepting only _John Dudley_ Viscount _Lisle_, _Anno_ 35 _Hen._ VIII.
who by every Knight, the Duke of _Norfolk_ excepted, is Ranked in the
first Division of Princes) and in a Scrutiny then taken, _Robt. Cecil_
Viscount _Craneborne_ is the second Viscount in the List that has been
Ranked with Princes, whence it became the frequent Practice in
succeeding Scrutinies, until _Anno_ 14 _Car._ I. And then (upon a
Question put in Chapter convened at _Westminster_ 23 _May_ 14. _Car._
I.) whether Earls Sons and Viscounts were eligible with Barons, it
passed in the affirmative, and that by general usage except in the two
cases just mentioned; and about the same time we find it reiterated
near that Time, for in two Scrutinies taken the 19th and 21st of that
Instant _May_, the Viscounts are therein reduced to the second
Division, and Ranked with the Barons.

THE Knights-Batchelors and Bannerets held the same Rank in King _Hen._
VIII’s Statutes, in all Scrutinies with Barons.

BUT tho’ the word in King _Hen._ VIIIth’s late Statutes is _Baronettus_
instead of _Banerettus_, yet is this frequently obvious in some ancient
Books and Records, as well as in those ancient Writers, long before the
Title of Baronet was conceived or brought into use.

IN the last place he who demands those Suffrages (the
Knights-Companions present) is by the Statutes of Institution to
receive them in writing; for in a Scrutiny taken _Anno_ 2 _Hen._ VI. at
the Election of _John_ Lord _Talbote_ and _Turnival_, the Dean of
_Windsor_, and the Register of the Order, _wrote down the Votes and
Nominations of every singular Knight present at the Day of Election_.

AND at another Scrutiny _Anno_ 4 _Hen._ VI. to fill up that which by an
Error in the Black Book is set down Sir _Henry Fitzhugh_, ’tis
inserted, _That the Dean and Register wrote down in Order_, (according
to their Seniority) _the Votes of the Knights-Companions_. And after
the Scrutinies began to be entred in the Annals, it is evident the
general Practice kept pace with the Injunction of the Statutes; only
there are two instances of an Election confirmed without taking a
Scrutiny in writing, one in the case of the Princes _Henry_ and
_Christiern_ IV. King of _Denmark_, where the Knights-Companions in a
Chapter convened at _Whitehall_, 14 of _July_ 1 _Jac._ I. gave in their
Votes _viva voce_, and immediately the Sovereign admitted them both
into the Illustrious Society; the other was the Case of _James_ Marquis
_Hamilton_, Elected the 2d of _Feb._ 20 _Jac._ I. with the vocal
consent of all the Knights-Companions.

IT is worthy observation, that this Method, and the omission of taking
the Scrutiny in writing, is not only contrary to the Law of the Order
expressly set down for a more stable consignation of the Action, and
more faithful transmission of it to Posterity, but exceeding
prejudicial to Persons of Honour, and Distinction, whose Names would
otherwise survive with great veneration among the candidates of this
Illustrious Order, and of which Honour many deserving Persons will be
hereafter deprived, if the Injunctions of the Statutes be not observed
in this particular respect.


                               SECT. XI.

               _The Presentation of it to the Sovereign._

THE Knights-Companions, having delivered their Suffrages, the Officer
by whom they are Collected, humbly presents to the Sovereign the
Nominations, for so it is recorded the Prelate of the Order acted in
the 9th of _Hen._ the Vth. If these Votes were taken in Chapter, the
Paper usually was immediately presented to the Sovereign who made his
Election, before the Chapter broke up; but if gathered in the Chapel,
tho’ it was given to the Sovereign, yet the choice was not made then,
but the Morning after, and this was the manner in the 2d and 5th Years
of Queen _Eliz._ Another time it hath not been presented till the
Vespers were finished, but in the Practice of latter Days the Scrutiny
hath not been given up to the Sovereign till the next Day at the
opening of the Chapel before Morning-Prayer, as in the 13, 15, 20, 30
Years of Queen _Eliz._ demonstrates, and was the accustomed Practice of
the 17th Year of King _Charles_ the first of ever-sacred Memory; the
last presentation was transcribed in a little Book, and with all due
Reverence offered upon the Knee, before any other Affair was transacted
in the Chapter.

THIS has been the general Use as we are ascertain’d, _Anno_ 2 _Hen._
VI. the Dean of _Windsor_, and the Register of the Order, having
Collected the Vote of every Knight, they were immediately given into
the Hands of the Sovereign’s Deputy; and in the same nature were they
presented on the 4th _Hen._ VI. when _John_ Duke of _Bedford_ was
Lieutenant, in the 20th of Queen _Eliz._; when the Suffrages were
Collected by Sir _Francis Walsingham_ the Chancellor, he gave them up
to the Earl of _Sussex_, then Lieutenant to the Sovereign.

BUT it’s evident from several Passages in the Blue Book of the Order,
that the Lieutenant afterward delivered them to the Sovereign, as is
apparent from the Records of the 30th, 34th, 38th, and the 40th Year of
Queen _Eliz._

In the 12th Year of K. _James_ I. some Exceptions arose upon the
Chancellor’s not presenting the Scrutiny to the Prince, (who at that
time was the Sovereign’s Lieutenant) but to the Sovereign himself,
which was an Error he fell into, as well as some of his Predecessor’s;
as the 2d, 3d, and 25th of _Eliz._ demonstrate.


    _The Sovereign’s Considerations upon the Qualifications of those
                             to be elected._

§ 12. As the Knights-Companions are under an Obligation, by the
Statutes, to nominate no Person, but who can bear the Test of the
afore-mention’d Qualifications, there’s a Standard of Honour provided
for the Sovereign, to measure the Extraction, Quality, and Merit of the
Person proposed to be elected, least it might chance, thro’ the
Indulgence of the Sovereign, this Fountain of Honour might be mudded by
the Choice of inferior and undeserving Persons, for the Statutes
run—because this _Order consists of Goodness, and honourable Virtue,
doth not admit Unworthiness and Villany_, and so by Consequence
secludes all Persons of mean Extraction and Merit.

The Qualifications for _Election_ are exhibited in the 2d Article, as
in the 18th are included those of _Nomination_: The Words of the
_Institution_ are, _That none shall be elected into the Order_; and
refer only to the Act of Election: For if we consult the rest of the
Statutes, and compare them with this Passage, they run according to
this Tenor, _That none shall be elected and chosen a Companion of this
Order_. These refer more principally to the Time of the Election, and
not to the _Investiture_ with _Garter_, and _George_, and
_Installation_, from the Expressions of _admitting_ and _receiving_
Knights into this _Order_, as the _Examplars_ of the _Statutes_ of
_Institution_ set forth. And this is farther illustrated, from another
Passage in the 2d Article of _Henry_ the VIII’s Statutes, where the
Word _Reproach_ is mentioned, saith, _The Guilt thereof so
incapacitates a Man’s Election, that for the future it’s a Bar, and
utterly disqualifies him for that Honour_.

There are Two Points requisite for _Qualifications and Endowments_;
first, to be a _Gentleman of Blood_; and, 2dly, a _Knight_ without
_Reproach_. By the Statutes of _Henry_ the Vth’s _Institutions_, no Man
ought to be elected, _unless he be a Gentleman born_. The _Examplar_ in
the _Black Book_ saith, _Unless he be worthy upon the Account of Birth
and Arms_: And in another Passage, _That he be one eminent for his
Demeanour and good Report_; which intimates the Conjunction of Blood
and Virtue, which make up the noblest Composition. The Statutes of King
_Henry_ VIII. are more extensive than those, and say, _He must be a
Gentleman by Name, Arms, and Blood_; and least this Character might
seem intricate and perplex’d, _A Gentleman of Blood_ is defin’d to be,
_One descended of three Descents of Nobles_, viz. _of Name and Arms,
both by his Father and Mother’s side_.

It’s certain _Gentility_ does not receive its Perfection in the Person
it was first devolv’d on, but is rather compleated by Succession: For,
among the _Romans_, tho’ the Father was Free-born, and of the
_Equestrian Cense_; yet it was farther requisite, that the Grand-father
should be the same, or else they could not obtain the Ring, one of the
_Symbols_ of the _Equestrian Order_, as _Pliny_ informs us. _Gentility_
hath its beginning in the Grand-father, its increase in the Father, and
full ripeness in the Son; and consequently in the Constitution of
_Gentility_, the Father and Grand-father conveying a Lustre to the Son,
make it entire and compleat; for its incongruous to suppose a ripeness
in the Son, unless there had been a former encrease in the Father, and
a longer Series from the Grand-father.

The memorable Instance of the Lord _William Paget_, who was divested of
the _Garter_ five Years after his Election, upon Pretence of his not
being a Gentleman of Blood by either Father or Mother, proceeded not
wholly from the defect in Point of Extraction, as _Haward_ relates, but
rather from the Prevalence and Practice of _John Dudley_, Duke of
_Northumberland_, by whose means he was most unjustly deprived of the
_Garter_; repenting, perhaps, at the great Honours he had done this
Lord, by his fair Character of him to King _Edward_ VI. when he
procured him a new Grant of those Arms, under the Great Seal of
_England_, when he was _Earl Marshal_, which he had some time before
received from the Garter Principal King of Arms.

But, admit the defect of _Blood_ and _Arms_, for three Descents, were
the true Cause of the recalling his _Garter_, that it might be
conferred upon the Earl of _Warwick_, eldest Son of the said Duke, who,
out of courtesie, is called so, in which Relation both _Haward_ and
_Stow_ have mistaken, for they were bestowed upon Sir _Andrew Dudley_,
Brother to the Duke; for tho’ he was put in the Scrutiny enter’d among
the _Annals_ of _Edward_ VI. in the Sixth Year of his Reign, upon St.
_George_’s Day, yet was the Earl neither then, nor at any other time,
elected.

The Ensigns of this most Noble Order, as soon as Queen _Mary_ ascended
the Throne, were with as much Honour restored to the Lord _Paget_, and
with as great and absolute an Authority, as they were disgracefully
taken from him. And in Confirmation of this Lord’s Restauration, he had
the _Garter_ buckled on his Leg, and the _Collar_ and the _Order_ put
about his Shoulders, with the _George_ depending, by two of the
Knights-Companions present; and the Garter King at Arms was order’d,
That he should take Care his _Atchievements_ should be replaced over
his _Stall_ at _Windsor_, which is the 9th on the Sovereign’s side. It
is observable, that the very Records of the Order brand his Degradation
as Injustice; as if it were inferable, That when Honour is conferred,
upon the Account of Virtue and exquisite Endowments, the Consideration
of these supplies the defect and obscurity of Extraction. The
Sovereign, whose Prerogative it was to declare and interpret the
Statutes, being present in Chapter, thought fit to qualifie the Law,
and gave him this honourable Commendation, _That he had highly deserved
of the Nation, by his Prudence and Counsel_.

And though there’s only inserted in the _Examplar_ of the _Black Book_,
_Virtue_ and _good Report_ for a Qualification, yet the same was
observed by the Sovereigns and Lieutenants in foregoing Times, with
great Circumspection; and that the _Magnanimity_, _Fortitude_,
_Prudence_, _Generosity_, _Fame_, _Reputation_, and other Virtues and
Excellencies, whether innate or acquired, of the Person proposed to
Election, have by prudent Inquisition been inspected, and brought to
the Touchstone, before they have been admitted into so noble and
illustrious a Body.

Those Qualities were chiefly consider’d and esteemed by _Henry_ V. for
which Reason, at an Election in the 9th Year of his Reign, he gave the
Preference, before others that were nominated and presented unto him,
to _John_, Earl Marshal, _William_, Earl of _Suffolk_, _John_, Lord
_Clifford_, Sir _Lewis Robertsack_, and Sir _Heer Tank Clux_.

_Humphry_, Duke of _Gloucester_, Deputy to K. _Hen._ VI. trod in the
same Steps, and did weigh, by the strict Rules of Fortitude and
Prudence, the gallant and noble Actions and Deserts of _John_, Lord
_Talbot_, before the Election, and gave in an Approbation worthy of his
own Judgment, and that Candidate’s Merit. And for this Reason it’s
expressed in the _Annals_ of the Order, that such noble and heroick
Qualifications should have the favour of Election preferrable to
others, as is evident in the Matter of Choice of Sir _Nicholas Carew_,
in the 28th of _Hen._ VIII. _That he was a very fit Person, upon the
Eminency of his Extraction and Fame, and the many noble and worthy
Actions he had performed; so as that all present did, without any
delay, unanimously approve of his Election_. And after this Tenure run
the Commendation of _Henry_, Earl of _Cumberland_, at his Election,
_viz._ _The many famous and loyal Atchievements performed by him, both
at several other times, and then more especially, when the Tumult of
Rebellion began to break forth in those Borders where he had his
Habitation_.

The 2d Point to treat on is, That no one is qualified for Election,
unless he be a _Knight_; or as it is expressed in one of the
_Examplars_ in the _Hatton Library_, _Unless girded with the
unstained Girdle of Knighthood_; so singular a regard the Law of the
Order hath to this particular Qualification above the rest: And least
Chance or Inadvertency might let slip a Person not Knighted into the
Scrutiny, were the Words inserted _ut minimum_, that he be at least a
_Knight_ before he be elected, when the Sovereign comes to make his
Choice. It is evident from the 2d Article in the Statutes, that it
hath long since received this Construction, as appears by an eminent
Instance. In the 17th of _Hen._ VIII. The Feast of St. _George_ being
celebrated at _Greenwich_, and the Sovereign being present, having
elected the Lord _Roos_, afterwards Earl of _Rutland_, into the
Society of this most noble Order; and being advertised on the Morrow
after St. _George_’s Day, while the Mass of _Requiem_ was
celebrating, _That he had not before received the Dignity of
Knighthood, according to the Statutes_, which positively enjoin,
_That whosoever is elected into this Society, should be in Degree at
least a Knight_; that is, actually _Knighted_ before-hand. And tho’
the Lord _Roos_ was, at the Time of his Election a Baron of this
Realm, which is a higher degree of Honour than a _Knight_; The
Sovereign after Mass re-assembled the _Knights-Companions_, and
annulled the Election, and commanded the _Garter_ and _George_, so
lately conferred, to be taken off, and in the same Place dubbed him a
Knight; and then he was Elected again, with an unanimous Consent, and
so declared by the Sovereign’s own Mouth; and was restored to his
_Ensigns_ and _Ornaments_, by the Dukes of _Norfolk_ and _Suffolk_.
Agreeable to this, it’s recorded in the _Red Book_ of the Order; that
none of the _English_, _Scotch_, or _Welsh Nation, how considerable
soever otherwise, in the Prerogative of Blood or Virtue, can be
Elected into this most honourable Society; but that he ought to be
first ennobled and rendered capable, by this first degree of Knightly
Honour_.

But this Law does not bind Foreign Princes; for by a Decree at
_White-Hall_, in 13 _Charles_ I. these Words, _ut minimum_, are
explained to relate to all Subjects, of what Degree soever, within the
Sovereign’s Dominions; but Foreign Princes ought not to be _Knighted_,
as the Basis and first Degree of _Chivalry_. The _Statutes of
Institution_, as to those before-mentioned, not only enjoyn them to be
_Knights_, but to be free of all _Infamy and Reproach_. In _Henry_ V’s.
Statutes, it stands, _Chivalier sans reproche_, which Answers in the
Latin, _Eques irreprehensus_; and the Argument used by the Duke of
_Bedford_, for promoting the Election of Sir _John Radcliff_, was, that
he had continued and exercised the Armies, the space of twenty eight
Years, without _Reproach_. King _Henry_ VIII. determined this Word
_Reproach_ into three Species; first, _when a Knight hath been
convicted of Heresy, against the Catholick Faith_; or _suffered any
publick Punishment for such Offence_: Here Heresy is reckoned among
those defects, that deprive Men of Honour; because it bends its Force
against the Catholick Church, which not only renders a Man, in the
ballance of _Honour_, of no _Weight_ and _Esteem_, but more than all
other Sins, makes him _Infamous_. And therefore when by _Tongue_,
_Pen_, or _Actions_, a Man endeavours to trample under Foot the _sacred
Law_, he scandalizeth Government, and seduceth others.

The second Point is, when any Knight hath been _arraigned, convicted,
and attainted of Treason_; however Q. _Elizabeth_ qualified this Point
by a Decree, made in the first Year of her Reign; _that in case any
Persons so convicted, were pardoned by the Sovereign, and restored in
Blood; every such Gentleman in Name, Arms, and Blood, and descended as
aforesaid, being otherwise qualified, according to the ancient Statutes
of the Order, should be thenceforth accounted Eligible, and might be
Chosen a Companion_. This Decree, it’s presumed, owes its Original,
upon the occasion of restoring in _Blood_ _William_ Marquiss of
_Northampton_, and the Lord _Robert Dudley_, after Earl of _Leicester_,
who had been attainted of High Treason in the first of Q. _Mary_: And
we find that in the next Feast of St. _George_, they recovered their
Privileges of Honour, and were preferred in _Nomination_, and on the
last Day of the Feast, were Elected into this most illustrious Society.

Though the Marquess of _Northampton_ had been formerly Elected in the
35 _H._ 8. and was restored in Blood, as I said before; it’s very
remarkable, that it was thought fit to descend to a new Nomination and
Election, as appears from the Decree it self, as it was performed upon
the third of _June Anno primo Eliz._

The last Point of Reproach, is, _where a Knight Companion hath fled
from Battle_; in which the _Sovereign_, or his _Lieutenant_, or other
_Captain_, (having the King’s Authority) were present; when Banners
were displayed, and both Sides proceed to Fight. Now for a Person to
behave himself cowardly in the Fight, abandon his Colours, leave his
Prince, Friends, and Companions, in hazard of Life, are undoubtedly
Concerns of a very high and reproachful Nature, and draw down Dishonour
upon the Order, the Sovereign, and Knights Companions, and a sufficient
indication of a pusilanimous Mind; that prefers to drag an infamous
Life, and makes his Honour a Sacrifice to a reproachful Safety; for the
Resolution of a right _Martial Spirit_, ought either to return decked
with Victory, or die upon the Bed of Honour.

By the Laws of King _Edward_ the Confessor, the _Soldier_ that runs
from his _Colours_, either in Land or Sea Service, his _Life_ and
_Estate_ were made liable to answer the Offence; and our Acts of
Parliaments have made it _Felony_, without _Benefit of Clergy_; for as
much as such desertion endangers the Estate of the _King_, _Nobility_,
and _Commonwealth_.

But the danger is of a far more dismal hue, when Officers, or he that
Commands in Chief, or who has any Post of Trust assigned him, either
quit it, or is found defective in his Duty, as was _Thomas Earl of
Lancaster_, who quitted the Army at the Siege of _Berwick_, the
consequence of which proved an abortion to the whole Design; and for
which he was proclaimed _Traytor_, _Anno_ 12 _E._ 2. And therefore
whoever is culpable of any of these three Points of _Reproach_, is
disqualified from being Elected into this most _noble Order_. Before we
proceed any farther, it may not be improper to take notice of an Error
which _Polydore Virgil_ hath interwove with one, and which _Erhardus
Celius_, in his History of _England_, hath copyed from that Author, but
refuted by the learned Pen of Dr. _Heylein_, _viz._ that the
_Knights-Companions_ have certain _Laws_ belonging to their Order,
whereby they are _obliged to help one another, and in Time of Battle
never to betake themselves to shameful Flight_: The _Statute Law_ of
the _Order_ is silent upon the first Clause, nor is the latter
otherwise to be taken, than one of those Points of Reproach spoke of in
the second _Statute of K. Henry_ VIII. which nulls the _Election_ of
the Person nominated, if he be peccant in that Point: Now that which
gives some Umbrage to the _Knights_ mutual Assistance and Defence, is
founded upon an Article in their _Statutes_, which prohibits the arming
themselves one against another, to create a mutual Affection, and to
extinguish Feuds, which is the Life and Soul of Society, and which the
Founder, to prevent Inconveniencies, had a great Regard to; and
therefore he Ordained, which has been confirmed since by other
Statutes; That none of the Knights-Companions should Arm themselves
against any of their _Fellows_, unless either in the Cause of his
Sovereign, or his own just Quarrel: And this Clause it was, that gave
the Handle to both Parties, that sided with the Houses of _York_ and
_Lancaster_; some firmly adhering to _Henry_ VI. whom they accounted
_Sovereign_ of the Order; and others taking Part with _Edward_ IV. as
esteeming him Sovereign _de Jure_, though not _de Facto_.

But more firmly to tye this Knot of Amity among this noble
_Fraternity_, least they should unhappily engage in Factions one
against another, and proceed so violently as might commence into
Actions of Blood and Slaughter; it was ordained, That if a
Knight-Companion should happen to be retained in the Service of a
Foreign Prince, to take up Arms in his Quarrel; and after his Adversary
desired to entertain another _Knight-Companion_ on his Side also; he
that was last invited, was bound to wave this Offer, and in no wise to
give his Consent. And upon this, the _Knights-Companions_ were obliged
to make special Precautions in that their Engagements; that if any of
his Fellows were retained on the other Side, and that if he knew not
that another of his _Fellows_ had been engaged with the Adversary, so
soon as it came to his Knowlege, he was obliged to relinquish the
Service he before had undertaken.

To these three Points of _Reproach_ we have set down, we find in a
Manuscript, that belonged to _Heny Grey_, third Marquiss of _Suffolk_,
a fourth added to these other three _Points_ of _Reproach_; in these
Words:


#That if any Knight of the Order, from henceforth, by Prodigality or
Ryot, wilfully or negligently, Dispend, Sell, Aliens, or do away his
Patrimony or Livelihood, by reason whereof, he shall not be able
honourably to maintain himself, and his Estate, in such honourable
manner, as may Conserve the honour of the said Order, and of himself;
in this Case he shall be Summoned by the Usher of Arms of the Order,
called the black Rod, by Commandment of the# Soveraign, #his#
Lieutenant, #or# Deputy; #to appear before his Majesty, or his
Commissioners, and the Knights of the Order, at the next# Chapter £
ensuing; there to be examined before the Soveraign, or his said
Commissioners, and the Knights and Companions of the said Order; and if
he be found in such great default of# Prodigality, insolent Riot, or
wilful Negligence; #that then the Soveraign, with the advice of the
Company of the said Order may deprive and degrade him of the said
Order, at the said Chapter, if it be their Pleasure.#


Though this fourth Point is not inserted into King _Henry_ VIII’s
Statutes, yet the Substance thereof seems to be approved of before; for
we find among some _Orders_, prepared by the Marquiss of _Exeter_, and
other Knights-Companions, at a Chapter at _Windsor_, the twenty fifth
and twenty sixth Days of _May_, _Anno_ 8 _Henry_ VIII. one of them was
something to this Purpose.


§. 13. Amongst the Number of these Candidates, the Sovereign is chiefly
to regard those who have _most Voices_, or whom he conceives most
requisite to contribute to the _Honour of the Garter_, and most
Beneficial to himself, and of most Advantage to his Crown and Kingdom.
We find the Law hath not always reserved the greatest Number of Voices,
as will appear from the Annals; yet it has sometimes confirmed the
Election, as in the Case of the Duke of _Queenberry_ _An._ 5 _Henry_
VI. where, after a due and sufficient Examination taken of the
_Scrutiny_, the Duke, by the consent of most Voices, was Elected into
the Stall of _Thomas_ Duke of _Exeter_; and so was the Election of Sir
_Nicholas Carew_, the twenty fourth of _April_, in the 28 _Henry_ VIII.

It is remarkable in a singular Instance, that when two Knights had on
either Side equal _Voices_; which was the Case of Sir _John Fastolf_,
and Sir _John Radcliff_; the first being esteemed more Worthy, by the
Sovereign’s Lieutenant, obtained the Election.

The second Inducement relates to such as, in all Appearance, may bring
most Renown to the _Order_, and advance it to a higher pitch of
Greatness; and these have in a great Measure been effected, by
enrolling Foreign Princes into this _illustrious Society_, whose Valour
and great Merit have proclaimed them deserving both of _Nomination and
Election_. And upon this Consideration, K. _Charles_ I. of blessed
Memory, _upon Consideration had of the glorious Atchievements, and high
Renown, of_ Gustavus Adolphus _King of Sweden; judged it a Part of his
Respect, not only to render him all Offices of Kindness and Friendship,
as to a Prince nearly allied, and his most special Friend; but also to
impart to him, as far as in him lay, the greatest and highest Honour
that might be, and especially such, wherewith the military Virtue of so
great a Captain was wont to be adorned_.

But the principal Motive thought requisite to Elect Foreign Princes
into this Society of Honour, hath been expressed in the _Commissions_
of _Legations_, _to be in Respect of their glorious Merits, ennobled by
the lustre and grace of their Heroick Virtues, their eminent Nobleness,
Grandeur, Prowess, and Magnificence; the renown of which, Fame had
divulged and spread Abroad throughout the World_.

Where the Advantage of the Sovereign’s Service was thrown into the
Ballance, no Consideration could outvie its Pretensions, as in 2 _H._
6. justifies; whose eminent Service for his King and Country, was the
sole Motive that crowned his Election: And the great Zeal and
Affection, which _John Jaspar Ferdinand de Marchin_ shewed for the
Cause and Service, and the recovery of the just Rights of King
_Charles_ II. was the strongest Inducement that swayed that Sovereign
to chuse him, in the tenth Year of his Reign, a Knight-Companion of
this most noble Order. But the last inducement is of the greatest
Latitude, for the _Sovereign_ has a Power to reject whosoever he
pleases, though they do exceed in multiplicity of _Voices_, and in
other _Qualifications_; and even to Elect a Person that’s but once
mentioned, as was shewn in the Person of _Casimire_, the fourth King of
_Poland_, _An._ 28 _Henry_ VI. who having only the single Vote of the
Lord _Scales_; yet upon respect to the _Sovereign_, how advantageous he
might be for his, and his Kingdom’s Interest, obtained the Election.

And of later Date, (as the Preambles for the carrying the Ensigns to
Foreign Princes set forth) the Advantages the Sovereign has conceived
to possess himself of, in the improving, confirming, and establishing,
of a most strict and _inviolable Bond_ of Friendship, and fair
Correspondence, between him and Foreign Princes, their Realms and
Subjects, hath been a grand Inducement to Elect such Princes into this
most noble Order.


§ 14. Upon the vacancy of any of the _Knights-Companions_ Stalls, the
_Election_ of others to supply those, is a Prerogative of the
_Sovereign_, and in some Cases to his Lieutenant; for it’s recorded in
the _Black Book of the Order_, in _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes: That _if any
Stalls fall Vacant, it should belong to the Sovereign, to Elect new
Knights, wheresoever he was Resident_; upon Condition, the Chapter
consisted of six compleat _Knights-Companions_; but if he chanced to be
out of his Realms, and the Number was deficient, and that his
Lieutenant held the _Feast of St. George_ at _Windsor_; in such a Case
the _Election_ belongs to the _Lieutenant_, who is first to be
certified of his _Sovereign_’s Pleasure, and what Esteem _he_ has for
the Candidates, to the intent such Information may guide, or direct his
Election.

This Power of _Election_ is fully acknowledged, by the
_Knights-Companions_ themselves, to be in the Sovereign; as the
fragment of a Letter demonstrates, sent from _the Chapter_, convened at
_Windsor_, upon the _Feast of St. George_, to _Henry_ V. then in
_France_; viz. _That the Sovereign, in what Place soever residing, may,
as is most fitting, Elect into a vacant Stall, (there being a
sufficient Number of Knights called to this Election) such as he shall
judge serviceable to his Crown, or do exceed others in deserts, and
nobleness of descent_: And at publishing the _Election_ of _Duke
Emanuel_ of _Savoy_, in the Reign of _Philip_ and _Mary_, who were
_joint Sovereigns_ of the _Order_; it’s styled, The Election of the
_King and the Queen_.

This grand Prerogative of the _Sovereign_ being not duly weighed by
_Polydore Virgil_, occasioned his tripping in this Affair, and drew
in _Claudius Coteræus_ into the same palpable mistake; for writing of
this _Order_, and the Succession of new Knights, reports in his
History of _England_, That _one Knight is received in the room of
another deceased, by the Choice and Election of all the rest_; and
_Erhard Celly_ in his _Anglo-Wirtemb._ does as falsely affirm, _That
no Person may be received into this Order, not so much as by the
Sovereign, unless with the common Consent and Suffrage of all the
Knights-Companions_.

But these Passages are altogether erroneous, the _Knights-Companions_
only _nominate_ the _Persons_, but the right of _Election_ remains
solely in the _Sovereign_ of the Order; for whosoever is honoured with
his Choice, is immediately admitted; and pronouncing barely the Name of
the Person in Chapter, constitutes the Election. After the Scrutiny
hath been taken, and presented to the Sovereign, he peruseth it
himself, or the _Chancellor_, or some other Officer of the _Order_ that
gathered it, reads it over to him; afterwards the Sovereign resolves
forthwith, upon some one or more of the Knights, contained in the
Scrutiny; and then publickly declareth the _Name_ of him, or them, he
does _Elect_; and by the bare Act of his _Pronunciation_, they Commence
Elected Knights; except now and then the Sovereign is pleased to give
his Reasons, why the Knight is Elected by him.

But though this Act of _Election_ be solely in the _Sovereign_, yet the
Consent of the _Knights-Companions_ is frequently recorded in the
_Annals_, and sometimes mentioned in the _Commissions_ of _Legations_
to _Foreign Princes_; not that the single Act of _Election_ is, in
truth, the Act of the whole Chapter, or is made invalid, without the
joynt Consent of the _Knights-Companions_, present at the Election; but
their Consent so expressed, is to be taken as an honorary Respect given
them by the Register, intimating rather an Applause, or Commendation of
their _Sovereign’s Choice_, as being in their Opinions Just and Right,
according to the Merit of the Elected, than a material Circumstance,
tending to the Ratification of the Election made by the Sovereign, as
if defective without it.


§. 15. Among other Duties incumbent on the _Register_, and expressed in
the Statutes of the _Order_, this is one: That the Register’_s Office
is to set down, and record for a Memorial, the Elections (or
Scrutinies,) and Names of the Knights Elected_: But in succeeding Times
a Scruple arose, if this was not needless, when the _Scrutiny_ should
be taken, yet no _Election_ made; to clear up which doubt, in a Chapter
held in 5 _Elizabeth_, on St. _George_’s-_Day_, it’s recorded as the
Sovereign’s Will and Pleasure, that thenceforward it should be Enacted,
and received as the Sanction of a _Law_, within this Order; _That if
any Nominations were taken from the Knights-Companions, the same should
be entered into the Annals, though there were no Election made of any
Person into the Order at that Time_: Which we presume was so Decreed,
out of great deference to those Princes and noble Personages, who, in
descending Times, should, by the glory of their Exploits, appear but
worthy of a _bare Nomination_ into so resplendent and illustrious an
Order. And in pursuance of this _Decree_, there is frequent mention
made of the delivery of the _Scrutiny_ into the Hands of the Register,
in order to be Recorded.

The Blue Book says, _Anno_ 22 _Elizabeth_; _That the Chancellor
himself_ delivered the _Knights-Companions Votes to the Register, to be
committed to Writing, for a perpetual Memorial; and accordingly the
Register, as his Duty obliged him, transcribed them, and put them in
their proper Place, with all Care and Fidelity_. _Anno_ 34 of the same
Queen, ’tis said, _the Votes were delivered to the Register, who took
care to Record them, according to usual Order_. Yet maugre this Law,
the Entry of Scrutinies hath been sometimes omitted, either by the
_Register_’s forgetfulness of the Decree, or some accidental
Miscarriages. In some Places of the Annals, in the room of
_Scrutinies_, we find Excuses entered, as it’s said, _Anno_ 28
_Elizabeth_; that the _Prelate_, immediately after _Vespers_, presented
the Scrutiny to the Sovereign; but because there was no Election made
of any new _Knights_, in regard of hurry, or weighty and pressing
Affairs, it was laid aside, and _through Neglect lost_, or at least
came not into the _Register_’s Hands, to be inserted in its proper
Place. And when the Dean of _Windsor_ collected the Scrutiny at
_Vespers_, _Anno_ 18 _Elizabeth_, it’s said, _No Election was made, nor
any thing else done_: The like Excuse is made, _Anno_ 5 _Charles_ I.
but the Fault is thrown upon the Chancellor; for though the Scrutiny
had been taken by him, during the _Vespers of the Feast-Day, yet would
he not suffer it to be entered_. In some Places we find, _Anno_ 31
_Elizabeth_, the _Votes_ being presented, _they were left with her_.
And _Anno_ 11 _Charles_ I. the Scrutiny of _Algernoon_ Earl of
_Northumberland_ never came to the Register’s Hands.

But the Law yet remains in force, that all _Nominations_ and _Votes_ of
the _Knights-Companions_ ought to be enter’d among the _Annals_,
whether Election be made or not, unless it shall please the
_Sovereign_, upon some Emergency, to forbid it: As appears but by one
Example of such a Prohibition, _viz._ _Anno_ 40 _Eliz._ where, by the
Queen’s special Command, the _Scrutiny then taken was not recorded
among the Acts of this most Noble Order_. But then it is declared, That
_the Register took care to set down all the Passages as they happened,
the Names only excepted_. And why the _Scrutiny_ is not inserted in the
_Registry_, _An._ 44 of _Eliz._ gives this Account: That upon
assembling the _Knights-Companions_, it seemed good to the Sovereign,
for several urgent Reasons, best known to her self, to give
Commandment, That for that time, _they would wholly forbear all
Scrutiny of Votes, and Nominations of Persons_; except which, there was
nothing wanting to heighten the Solemnity of that Assembly: But this in
the _Annals_ is said to be _præter morem_, contrary to the usual Custom.


§ 16. _Anno_ 27 of _Eliz._ there is a remarkable Occurrence, not to be
passed over; for the Earls of _Rutland_ and _Derby_, the morrow after
St. _George_’s Day, were desirous to have seen the _Scrutiny_, which
was committed into the Custody of the Dean of _Windsor_, to be
registred, in pursuance of the before-mentioned Decree, _Anno_ 5
_Eliz._ but he returned a modest denial, and said, _It ought not to be
seen before it was register’d_. The Earls, not satisfied with this
Answer, requested the Opinions of the _Knights-Companions_, present at
the Feast, on this Affair; who, upon mature Deliberation, adjudged the
Point against them; and since it has been a standing Rule, that no
Knight-Companion ought to see whom the other hath named.


§ 17. It hath chanced, that tho’ the _Nominations_ for _Election_ have
been received, presented and perused, yet the Sovereign hath thought
expedient to defer it, upon several Considerations, and principally
where an intent was to keep an open Stall; but we must understand this
of such _Scrutinies_ as are taken of Course, at the _Vespers_ on the
Feast-day.

And the most memorable Example of this Kind, is that of the Emperor
_Sigismond_, who expired in the 16th Year of K. _Henry_ VI. whose Stall
was reserved Twenty One Years, and then determined, that Prince
_Edward_, the Sovereign’s only Son, should fill it up, being at that
time about Six Years of Age. This is the first Emperor, whose Election
we find register’d in the _Annals_, being about the 7th of _May_, in
the 4th Year of _Henry_ V. styled _Sigismundus Imperator Almanicus_.

And keeping a vacant Stall was sometimes given as a Reason by the
Sovereign for his deferring an Election, as is plain from _An._ 13.
_Car._ I. when the Scrutiny taken the Day before was read over in the
Chapter-House, the Sovereign declared, _That he would receive no Man
into the Order before his Son_ Charles. Whereupon all the
Knights-Companions gave their Opinions, _That this Resolution was
rather the effect of Justice, than Fatherly Indulgence; since they all
acknowledged him, to be more a Prince by Merit, and towardliness of his
Youth, than by the Fortune of his Birth_. At which the Sovereign
expressed his Satisfaction no otherwise than by Silence.

And in like manner, _Anno_ 15 _Charles_ I. when the Chancellor of the
Order gave up the Scrutiny to the Sovereign, he declared——_That he had
a purpose to have Chosen Prince_ Rupert, _his Nephew, a Knight of the
Order; but being then a Prisoner with the Emperor, he would not Elect
any at that Time_; whereupon, a vacancy of a _Stall_ was reserved. It
has sometimes been the Sovereign’s Pleasure to defer Elections, without
expressing the Cause, as in the 13 of _Elizabeth_; though she perused
the Scrutiny in Chapter, yet the _Blue Book_ informs us; That the _said
Sovereign made no Election, though two Stalls were vacant_. Thus was it
in the 2, 3, 11, and 12, of K. _James_ I. where no other mention is
made than this; _none were admitted into the Order this Year_.

Sometimes we find these _Prorogations of Elections_ recorded, as solely
done by the Will of the _Sovereign_; and at other Times by the
_Sovereign_, and the approbation of the _Knights-Companions_; to the
first of these we find a Memorial, in the 22 of _Elizabeth_, on the 24
of _April_; that the _Knights-Companions_ had a Message sent to their
Chapter, held before Morning-Prayer; _That it was the Pleasure of the
Sovereign to prorogue the Election to the following Year_. And so it
was, in the 10th of _Charles_ I. though the Nomination was taken by the
Chancellor, and presented to the Sovereign in Chapter, _the Sovereign
did not think fit to make any Election at all_. And for a Testimony of
the second, we meet with this Instance, in the 27th of _Elizabeth_;
_that with the concurrent Approbation and Assent of all the
Knights-Companions then assisting, the Sovereign thought fit to put off
the Election to another Time_. As to the seeming difference of the
_Sovereign’s absolute Authority_, and yet the _Knights-Companions
Approbation_, we have cleared up that Point in the _Act of Election_;
for though it is _his_ unquestionable Authority and Prerogative, to
Prorogue _Elections ad libitum_, yet out of Respect, and Honour to the
_Knights-Companions_, their Approbation hath been sometimes exprest.


§ 18. When any Knight-Companion hath received a Summons, to appear at a
Chapter of Election, and doth wilfully refuse, or withdraw himself, he
was to be mulct a Mark for his Disobedience, which King _Henry_ VIII’s
Statutes inlarged to twenty Shillings, payable to the Dean and College
of _Windsor_, to pray for defunct Souls. And at his next appearance in
Chapter, he was to remain kneeling in the midst of them, before the
Sovereign, or Deputy, till he was restor’d to their Favour: Yet upon a
just Cause signified to the _Sovereign_ some time before, under the
Seal of his Arms, he was excused, if it was found just and feasible; if
not, it was rejected, and he remained Punishable.

And for greater Caution, this Clause was formerly inserted, in the
_Letters of Summons_; where, after the Time and Place for Election was
certified, and command given to observe both, the Letter concludes
thus, _et se estre ny poues nous Signifies soubz, &c._ and if it cannot
be accomplished, that is, if the Knight-Companion could not meet at the
time assigned, to perform what the Statutes oblige, he should then
_signify to the Sovereign, under his Seal, the cause of his Impediment;
so that he might perceive by his Excuse_, whether it was worthy of
Acceptance, or he in Fault or not.




                                CAP. X.

  _The_ Investiture of a Knight-Subject _with the_ Garter and George.


IF the Knight chance to be at _Windsor_, that is newly Elected, or
wheresoever the Chapter is held, after the Sovereign hath signified his
Pleasure in the Election of the Person, the _Garter_ is immediately
dispatched out of the Chapter, to give him the Intelligence; as is
apparent upon the Choice of the Lord _Howard_, and Sir _Henry Marney_,
_Anno_ 2 _Henry_ VIII. who was dispatched from the Chapter, to conduct
them to the _Sovereign’s_ Presence, to be invested with the principal
Ensigns of the Order, the _Garter_ and _George_.

And as _Garter_ hath been accustomed to signify in Person the
_Election_ of a _Knight_, in like manner an Election is _signified_, by
the Letters of the _Sovereign_, when he is pleased (for the greater
Honour of the Person) to weave by verbal Notice: In such Cases, it’s
the _Chancellor’s_ Office to draw up the _Letters_, and they are to
pass, both under the _Sovereign’s Sign Manual_, and Signet of the
Order. Such a particular mark of Distinction and Honour was conferr’d
on our Sovereign of _Blessed Memory_, _King Charles_ II. Sir _John
Burrough Garter_, carrying the Letter.


_Charles Rex_,

“Our most dear and entirely beloved Son, having, to our great Comfort,
seen and considered the ripeness of your Youth, and conceived joyful
and pregnant Hopes of your manly Virtue, in which we are assured you
will increase, to your own Honour, both in Prowess, Wisdom, Justice,
and all Princely Endowments; and that the Emulation of Chevalry will,
in your tender Years, provoke and encourage you, to pursue the Glory of
Heroick Actions, befitting your Royal Birth, and our Care and
Education. We with the Companions of our most Noble Order of the
Garter, assembled in Chapter, holden this present Day, at our Castle of
_Windsor_; have Elected and Chosen you one of the Companions of our
Order. In Signification whereof, we have sent unto you, by our Trusty
and Well-Beloved Servant, Sir _John Burrough_ Knight-Garter, and our
principal King of Arms, these our _Royal Letters_, requiring you to
make your speedy repair unto us, to receive the Ensigns of our most
Noble Order, and to be ready for your Installation, upon the 21st Day
of this present Month. Given under the Signet of our Order, at our
Castle of _Windsor_, the 20th of _May_, in the 14th Year of our Reign,
1638.”

    _To our dearly beloved Son Prince_ Charles.


This is the only Instance we have met with, where a Letter was sent to
an Elect Knight, and he at the same time present at Court; but when an
Election is confirmed, and the Person remote from the Court, then the
general Tenure of the Letter is, both to signify his Election, and
Summon him to his Investure, with the Garter and George, as was
performed by the Earl of _Derby,_ and Sir _Edward Strafford_, to King
_Henry_ of _France_.

But where the Sovereign is pleased to mention particular Services, to
recommend the Election of a Knight, the Preamble of the Letter is
worded accordingly; and as this is a Case not very frequent, it will
not be amiss to exemplify it in the Choice of Sir _John Falstoff_,
where the Letter runs thus—_We considering the virtuous Fidelity you
have shown, and the honourable Exploits you have done, in the Service
of our thrice renowned Father, and that in our Service also, you (as
many others) have given Proof of that Honour, and these Deserts,
wherewith God hath endowed you, always suffering, as is the part of a
good Subject, the Pains and Toils of War, for the vindicating and
maintaining of our just Right, Claim, and Title, have Chosen you one of
our Companions of our Order._

When the Letter barely signifies Election, that is, when the
Sovereign does not design a present investure with the Garter and
George, but defers it till he takes Possession of his Stall, the Day
of his Installation is inferred towards the end of the Letter; and
upon his appearance at _Windsor_, so soon as he appears in the
Chapter-House, the Garter is first buckled about his left Leg, then
follows his Investure with the rest of the Ornaments of the Order,
and lastly his Installation. And this was the Case of _Henry_ Earl of
_Northumberland_, _Anno_ 29 _Henry_ VIII. whose Investure of the
Garter was deferr’d till his appearance at _Windsor_, and then the
whole Ceremony was performed at once.


§ 2. If the elect Knight be at hand, where the Chapter is convened, and
the Garter hath been sent to make known to him the Honour, and Conduct
him into the _Chapter-House_, to receive the Garter and George, before
they break up, Intimation being given of his approach, the Sovereign
sends out two of the Knights-Companions to meet him, who, after a
mutual Salute, Conduct him between them, to the Presence of the
Sovereign, Garter going before them. Thus was _Ubrick_ Duke of
_Holstein_, _Anno_ 3 _Jac._ I. introduced into the Chapter, between
Prince _Henry_, and the Earl of _Dorset_, and _Christian_ Duke of
_Brunswick_ _Anno_ 22 _Jac._ I. between _William_ Earl of _Pembrook_
and _Philip_ Earl of _Montgomery_, to receive the Garter and George.
The 6th of _November_, _Anno_ 14 _Charles_ II. _Christian_ Prince of
_Denmark_ being elected at a Chapter held at _White-Hall_, and then
absent, the Garter King was dispatched next Day by the Sovereign, to
inform him, and to desire his Presence the next Day, that he might
receive his Investure; which accordingly was done, being conducted
between the Earls of _Lindsey_ and _Manchester_ into the Chapter,
Garter preceding them, and after three Obeysances, they brought him up
to the Sovereign. Among Knights-Subjects, we find the Lord _Burley_,
and the Lord _Grey_, were conducted to the Sovereign by the Lord
_Clynton_, and the Earl of _Bedford_, _Anno_ 14 _Elizabeth_, _cum
multis aliis_. _Anno_ 4 _Jac._ I. _Robert_ Earl of _Salisbury_
proceeded up to the Sovereign’s Throne, between the Earls of
_Nottingham_ and _Dorset_. In the Reign of King _Charles_ I. the Earl
of _Northampton_ was conducted to receive the Garter in the
_Chapter-House_ at _Windsor_, between the Earls of _Pembrook_ and
_Montgomery_. And when King _Charles_ II. appeared, upon his Letter of
Summons, at the Chapter held in the withdrawing Chamber in _Windsor
Castle_, to receive his Investure, two of the Senior Knights, _viz._
_Philip_ Earl of _Pembrook_ and _Montgomery_, and _Thomas_ Earl of
_Arundel_ and _Surry_, were sent out to Conduct him in, who brought him
between them unto the Sovereign, the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod
going before.

The Duke of _Monmouth_ being elected at a Chapter held in the
withdrawing Room at _White-Hall_, the 28th of _March_, _Anno_ 15
_Charles_ II. Garter was immediately sent to him in the Sovereign’s
Bed-Chamber, who being met at the Door by the Earls of _Lindsey_ and
_Manchester_, both the Garter and the Black Rod passed to the lower End
of the Room before the Duke and the two Knights-Companions, whence they
proceeded up to the Sovereign with three Reverences. At the Election of
_James_ Duke of _Cambridge_, in the same Room at _White-Hall_,
(_December_ 3. _Anno_ 18 _Charles_ II.) Garter was also sent forth into
the Bed-Chamber, to acquaint him that the Earl of _Manchester_, and the
Duke of _Monmouth_, were appointed by the Sovereign and Chapter to
bring him in thither; that done, the aforesaid Knights-Companions arose
and went to the Duke, whom meeting at the Bed-Chamber Door, they took
their compass about the rest of the Knights-Companions, (then standing)
and brought him between them, from the lower End of the Room, close
before the Sovereign, the Garter and Black Rod proceeding.


§ 3. The Knight elect being thus introduced to the Sovereign, bows with
all Reverence, and formerly a short gratulatory Speech was the vogue,
that set forth his acknowledgment of his Sovereign’s Royal Favour, and
the grateful Respect he bore to the Knights-Companions for his Election.

_Anno_ 28. _Hen._ VIII. we find Sir _Nicholas Crew_, after he had been
conducted into the Chapter-House at _Windsor_, to receive his
Investiture, thus to address himself: giving _infinite Thanks both to
the Sovereign and whole Society, for that they had vouchsafed to
receive him into the Honour of this most illustrious Order, being a
Person in his own Esteem most unworthy thereof_: In the next Place
professed, _That whereas he was preferred in this Choice before many
others, much more deserving than himself, it was not to be attributed
to his Merits, or any Thing by him performed, but meerly to the
Sovereign’s Bounty, and the Favour of the Knights-Companions towards
him_.

The conferring of so singular an Honour, being thus thankfully own’d,
the Ceremony of Investiture begins; the _Garter_ first takes place, as
the most ancient and chiefest _Ensign_, and then the _George_; but the
compleat Investiture is not performed until the Elect Knights are
installed at _Windsor_. Formerly the manner of robing of them was
performed on this wise: First, the Elect Knight set his Foot upon a
Stool, and then one of the Knights-Companions, by the Sovereign’s
appointment, as his Substitute, buckled the enobled Garter about his
left Leg, as may be seen in the _Antiquities of_ Warwickshire, in an
old Draught of the Combats of Sir _John Astley_, who was inrolled in
this illustrious Body, and is so represented. But of later Date, the
Elect Knight kneeled on his right Knee, whilst this Ceremony was
performed, in which space the Words of _Admonition_ and
_Signification_, at this part of the Investiture, were read. The
_Admonition_, upon the buckling of the Garter, in the _English_
Statutes of K. _Hen._ VIII. is set down on this manner:


  _SIR,_

_The loving Brethren of the Order of the Garter, have received you
their Brother and Fellow; and in Token of this, they give and present
you this present Garter, which God grant that you receive and wear from
henceforth to his Praise and Glory, and to the Exaltation and Honour of
the said Noble Order, and your self._


Afterwards it was decreed, at a Chapter held at _Windsor_, the 5th of
_August_, _Anno_ 1 _&_ 2 _Phil._ and _Mary_, to this effect: ‘That not
only the same Advertisements, which were wont to be given to Strangers
at their Investitures, should be likewise given to Knights-Subjects,
that for the future should be elected and install’d; and with a farther
Proviso, ‘That among the Knights-Companions there should not be any
difference either in Ceremony or Habit.’

Hereupon the aforesaid Tenure ceased to be used upon the fixing of the
Garter, and one Form remained at the Investiture of Strangers and
Knights-Subjects, which is pronounced by the Chancellor, if the
Sovereign or his Lieutenant be present, otherwise by the Register.


“To the Laud and Honour of Almighty God, his immaculate Mother, and St.
_George_ the holy Martyr, tye or gird your Leg with this noble Garter,
wearing it to the increase of your Honour, and in Token and Remembrance
of this most noble Order; remembring that thereby you being admonished
and encouraged, in all just Battels and Wars, which only you shall take
in Hand, both strongly to fight, valiantly to stand, and honourably to
have Victory.”


But against the Investiture of K. _Charles_ II. the Words of the
Signification being better weighed and considered, were thus methodized:


“To the Honour of God Omnipotent, and in Memorial of the blessed Martyr
St. _George_, tye about thy Leg, for thy Renown, this noble Garter;
wear it as the Symbol of the most illustrious Order, never to be
forgotten or laid aside; that thereby thou may’st be admonished to be
couragious; and having undertaken a just War, into which only thou
shalt be engaged, thou may’st stand Firm, valiantly Fight, and
successfully Conquer.”


The Princely Garter being thus buckled on, and the Words of the
Signification pronounced, the Elect Knight is brought before the
Sovereign, who puts about his Neck the _George_, pendant at a
Sky-colour’d Ribband, at which part of the Ceremony, the Admonition
used at the adorning of an installed Knight with the Collar of the
Order, (only changing the Word Collar for Ribband) is pronounced; but
were alter’d upon the Occasion assign’d before.


“Wear this Ribband about thy Neck, adorn’d with the Image of the
blessed Martyr, and Soldier of Christ, St. _George_; by whose Imitation
provok’d, thou may’st so overpass both prosperous and adverse
Adventures, that having stoutly vanquished thy Enemies, both of Body
and Soul, thou may’st not only receive the Praise of this transient
Combat, but be crown’d with the Palm of eternal Victory.”


Greater Respect is conferr’d upon foreign Princes, who receive their
Election here, than abroad; because the Sovereign most usually performs
the Investiture himself; as was solemniz’d upon _Philip_, King of
_Castile_, when the Sovereign took the Garter from the King at Arms,
and fixed it on his Leg, and Prince _Henry_ fasten’d the Buckle.

Queen _Elizabeth_ her self buckled the Garter about the Leg of _John
Casimier_, Count Palatine of the _Rhine_, and hung about his Neck a
Gold Chain with the _George_ at it. And the like Honour did King
_James_ I. confer upon the Duke of _Holstein_, in the 3d Year of his
Reign.

Sometimes it happens, tho’ very rarely, for the Sovereign, out of his
special Grace and Favour, to condescend to Honour a Knight-Subject this
way; tho’, when Queen _Elizabeth_ was pleased to adorn the Lord
_Burleigh_ with the Garter, the _Annals_ record it to be done as it
were _by the by_. The same Favours she bestow’d, tho’ at different
times, upon _Henry_, Earl of _Sussex_, and the Earl of _Shrewsbury_.
King _James_ I. invested _Henry_, Earl of _Northampton_, with the
principal Ensigns of the Order, as a Person worthy of so great an
Honour: And the _Blessed Martyr_ placed both the _Garter_ and the
_George_, with his own Hands, upon King _Charles_ II.

Sometimes the Sovereign hath but performed part of the Investiture, and
laid his Commands on the senior Knight to do the rest. Thus, _Anno_ 13
_Henry_ VIII. the Sovereign reached out the Garter to the Marquis of
_Dorset_, and commanded him to buckle it about the Leg of the Earl of
_Devonshire_; which, whilst he was about, the Duke of _Norfolk_ gave
him his Assistance, and the Sovereign put on the Gold Chain. At the
Investiture of _Christian_, Duke of _Brunswick_, _Anno_ 22 _Jac._ I.
the Sovereign put about his Neck the Blue Ribband, whereat hung the
Effigies of St. _George_; and the Earls, who introduc’d him to the
Sovereign’s Presence, buckled on the Garter. Thus did the Sovereign to
_William_, Earl of _Northampton_, _Anno_ 4 _Car._ I. and the Earl of
_Pembroke_ fasten’d the Garter about his left Leg.

This Order of Investiture began to be inverted _Anno_ 22 _Jac._ I. the
_George_ and the Ribband being first put on, and the Garter last. And
so was it performed when the Prince of _Denmark_, Dukes of _Monmouth_,
_Cambridge_, and _Albemarle_, received their Investiture in the Reign
of King _Charles_ II. The Garter, as it was the first, so is the
principal and most worthy Ensign of the Order; and, in the Practice of
all former Times, had always the Preference given to it. The
Investiture with these two Ensigns, hath generally been performed by
the two senior Knights, at the Command of the Sovereign; but always in
his Presence, the Chapter sitting; but if absent, then by his
Lieutenant. For, in 31 _Eliz._ the Lord _Buckhurst_ being elected at
_Whitehall_, and coming to Court wholly ignorant of the Affair, and
after the Sovereign was risen, (yet leaving the Chapter sitting) her
Lieutenant invested him both with the _Garter_ and _George_. After the
Solemnity is compleated, the elect Knight renders most humble Thanks to
the Sovereign, and with due Respects salutes the Knights-Companions,
who re-salute the elect Knight, and joyfully receive him into their
Society. If two or more elect Knights receive this Investiture at one
time, as soon as the Senior is invested, and his humble Thanks
presented, he moves downwards towards the Chapter-House Door, and there
stands till the next Junior Knight is invested; and if there be more,
so on until the Chapter break up.


§ 4. Where a Knight-Subject, at the time of his Election, is far
distant from Court, or beyond Sea, and the Sovereign determines to send
him the Two principal Ensigns of the Order, the Charge of this Employ
does of right belong to the _Garter_. For the Proof of which there are
divers Precedents.

The Letters heretofore sent from the Sovereign, along with the Ensigns
of the Order, to the elect Knights, have, for the most part, been drawn
after the Form of those that certify the Election, and differs only in
the last Clause, which requires the elect Knight to repair to the
Sovereign: The difference lay not in the Body, but in the Direction of
the Letter, which was always worded according to the Quality of the
Person to whom it was sent. As to a Knight-Batchelor, the Direction
was, _To our trusty and well-beloved_; and to an Earl, _Right trusty,
and right well-beloved Cousin_; to a Duke, _Right trusty, and right
entirely beloved Cousin_, &c.

The Forms of those Letters, sent upon like Occasions to
Knights-Subjects, when King _Charles_ II. was beyond Sea, were penn’d
after another Model, and contained other additional particular Clauses;
as, 1. Power to wear the _Star_ of Silver about St. _George_’s Cross;
2. The Great Collar of the Order; and, 3. To style themselves _Knights,
and Companions of the Order of the Garter_, in as ample a Manner, as if
they had been installed at _Windsor_; with an Assurance of receiving
the whole Habit there, when the Sovereign was restored to the
Possession thereof.

And it appears from some of these Letters, that by reason Sir _Edward
Walker_, Garter, was otherwise employ’d in the Service of the
Sovereign, when they were transmitted, the Sovereign pitch’d upon other
Persons, to carry both the Letters and Ensigns of the Order, and yet
continued the Garter in the Rights of his Office. However, Sir _Edward_
esteeming this devolving his Employment on others, as an Invasion on
the Rights of his Office; and having a just regard for the Interest of
his Successors, no less than his own, humbly petitioned King _Charles_
II. for Redress, and obtained his gracious Reference thereupon, to
several _Knights_ of the Order, to examine the Matter, and to give in
their Report, what they found, and what they thought proper to be
effected therein; and upon whose Report the Sovereign did him full
Right by his gracious _Declaration_. For the Dukes of _Buckingham_ and
_Hamilton_, and the Marquis of _Newcastle_, to whom this Affair was
referr’d, gave in their Report to the _King_ at _Breda_, _May_ 27. 1650.


_We_, George, _Duke of_ Buckingham, William, _Duke of_ Hamilton, _and_
William, _Marquis of_ Newcastle, _Knights of the most noble Order of
the Garter, having read and consider’d the within written Petition, do
find the Allegations therein mentioned to agree with the Statutes and
ancient Practices of the said Order; and that Garter King of Arms, and
his Deputies, ought to bear all Letters-Patents appertaining to the
Brethren of the said Order, and all Elections to the Knights elect. And
we do therefore make this Report to your Majesty, to the end you may be
pleased to mantain the Petitioner in his just Rights; and that no
Example lately made may be brought in Precedent against him, or his
Successors in the said Office._

                                                        _G._ Buckingham.
                                                        Hamilton.
                                                        _W._ Newcastle.


It was formerly the Practice, to send the Book of Statutes, under the
common Seal of the Order, together with the Letters signifying an
Election, and the Ensigns of the Order, no less to a Knight Subject
than to a Stranger, that he might peruse and advise thereupon, whether
he would accept of the Election, or not; for so it appears, _Anno_ 4
_Hen._ VI. by the Letters sent to Sir _John Falstoff_.

Within a few Days after Prince _Rupert_ was elected into this Order,
(being then in _Holland_) a Commission of Legation was prepared to be
sent thither, with the _Garter_ and _George_, by Sir _John Burrough_,
Kt. to perform the Investiture with them; but Sir _John_ dying,
prevented the Ceremony. Some time after the Prince had been in
_England_, the then Sovereign thought fit to lay his Commands on Sir
_James Palmer_, Chancellor of the Order, to attend his Highness, to
declare the Reason why the said Commission was not sent and executed,
as was designed, as well as to deliver him the Commission it self; to
the intent (being prevented of receiving his Installation at _Windsor_,
because that Castle continued in the Possession of the Rebels) it might
remain with him as a Memorial of his Sovereign’s Princely Favour, and
Respect to his Quality and Merits, and for a farther Evidence of his
being admitted into this most Noble Order, since there was no other
Memorial thereof, but the Minutes of his Election, and this Commission.
And accordingly on _Monday_, the 14th of _January_, 1644. the
Chancellor, accompanied with Dr. _Christopher Wren_, Register, and Sir
_Edward Walker_, newly made Garter, attended the Prince at his Lodgings
in _Oxford_; who, having notice of their Design, receiv’d them with all
obliging Civility; and the Chancellor, in an eloquent Speech, made
known to his Highness his Sovereign’s Commands, and the Intent of his
coming; which was no sooner finished, but Sir _James Palmer_ presented
his Petition to the Prince, who gave his Majesty many humble Thanks for
this gracious Message; and acknowledged his Majesty’s Favours beyond
his Desert; but promised he would study to be more worthy by his
Actions, than in return of Words; with many Thanks to the Chancellor,
and other Officers of the Order, for their Trouble: Whereupon they took
their Leave, and the Chancellor went immediately to his Majesty, and
gave him a Narrative of what they had done.


§ V. It was an ancient Custom, and part of the Ceremony belonging to
the Investiture with the Garter, to give him an Oath, whether he was a
Stranger or a Subject-Knight, which we find styled, _The Oath in such
Cases accustomed to be taken_; and which was to this effect; _That the
Knight should well and faithfully keep and observe, so far as God
should enable him, all that was contained in the Statutes of the
Order_: But this of late hath been disused, and not imposed, unless
upon foreign Princes.

It is observable, that _Anno_ 4 _Hen._ VI. a particular Commission was
issued, to the Earls of _Warwick_, _Salisbury_, and _Suffolk_, with
Power, to any Two, or One of them, to receive this Oath from Sir _John
Falstoff_, upon his Investiture; which was besides the Oath his Proctor
was afterwards to take at the Installation, which Sir _John_ empowered
him to do on his behalf; which was, _Such Oath as should be required at
the time of Installation_.

Altho’ we have fully treated of the Ceremony and Manner of investing a
Knight elect, with the _Garter_ and _George_, we shall subjoin Two or
Three considerable Instances, as most proper to this Place.

When _Philip_, Prince of _Spain_, _Anno_ 1 _Mariæ_, had these Ensigns
of the Order sent him, the Sovereign joyn’d Garter King of Arms, with
the Earl of _Arundel_, to perform the Investiture; who, upon notice of
his arrival on the Coast of _England_, set forward on their Journey to
_Southampton_; where, on _Friday_ the 20th of _July_, they took Water,
and meeting the Prince before he landed, entered his Barge, and gave
him notice of his Election in a short Speech; which being ended,
_Garter_ having the Garter in his Hand, kissed it, and so presented it
to the Earl, who forthwith fasten’d it about the Prince’s Leg; and
after _Garter_ had presented the Earl with the _George_, hanging at a
Chain of Gold, he put it likewise about the Prince’s Neck. The Ceremony
of Investiture being thus performed, the Prince came on shore at
_Southampton_; and on the uppermost Stair were ready attending his
landing, the Marquis of _Winchester_, Lord High Treasurer of _England_,
with divers other Lords: The Prince gave the Lord _Williams_ his White
Staff, and made him Lord Chamberlain of his Houshould; and Sir _Anthony
Brown_, Master of his Horse, presented him, from the Queen, a Horse
with a Foot-cloth of Crimson Velvet, richly embroider’d with Gold and
Pearls, having the Bridle and all other Furniture suitable, whereon he
rode to the Cathedral, and after Prayers to the Lodging prepared for
him.

Concerning the _Garter_’s Investiture of the Earl of _Warwick_, at
_Newhaven_ in _France_, the first of _May_, _Anno_ 5 _Eliz._ is as
follows: The _Garter_ repairing first to the Earl’s Lodgings, put on
his Mantle in the next Chamber to the Earl’s, and proceeded into the
Earl’s Chamber; where, having made Three Reverences, he buckled the
Garter about his left Leg, and after put on the _George_ and the
Ribband about his Neck; reading to the Earl the Words of the
Signification, appointed to be pronounced at the Investiture; which
being concluded, _Garter_ retir’d into the Room where he had put on his
Mantle, and there disrobed himself, and so the Ceremony ended.

It was the Custom about these Times, for the Nobility, Allies, or
Friends, to the elect Knight, to send him by the _Garter_, several
_Garters_ and _Georges_, as Marks of Congratulation for the Honour he
was to receive, which the _Garter_ delivered to him when the
Investiture was finished, and he had put off his Robe, with the
particular Services and Respects of those Friends who had bestow’d
them. For thus was it with the Earl of _Warwick_, at _Newhaven_, and
the Lord _Scroop_ at _Carlisle_, _Anno_ 26 _Eliz._ At the _Garter_’s
return to Court, he is obliged to deliver an Account to the Sovereign,
how he hath discharged his Employment; and by special Directions from
the elect Knight, who presents the highest Respects he can express, as
well to the Sovereign as to the rest of the Knights-Companions, for
honouring him with a Reception into so illustrious a Body.

We shall close this Section with a brief Account of the Investiture of
the Duke of _Gloucester_, on _Easter-day_ in the Morning, being the
14th of _April_, 1653. In reference to which Ceremony there was
provided:


1. A _Garter_ with the Motto, to be tyed about his left Leg.

2. A _George_ in a Ribband, to be put about his Neck.

3. An embroider’d _Cross_ of St. _George_, with a _Garter_ and _Star_,
  to be sew’d on the left Shoulder of the Duke’s Cloak.

4. A Velvet Cushion, whereon the _Ensigns_ and _Ornaments_ of the Order
  were to be laid.


For the Honour of the Order, and his said Highness, Sir _Edward
Walker_, Garter, humbly proposed, That he might be assisted by Two or
Four Knights in performing his Duty.

That his Highness the Duke might receive the Ensigns of the Order, in
the Presence-Chamber of the Princess Royal, or in his own, accompanied
with the Queen of _Bohemia_, her Royal Highness, and some other Persons
of Honour and Quality.

That his Highness having placed himself under the State, _Garter_
should take the Cushion upon his Arms, on which were to be laid all the
particular Ornaments just now mentioned; being assisted with the
Knights, and a Passage left for him to make his Three Obeysances, he
should proceed up towards the Duke, and lay the Cushion with the
Ornaments upon a Stool set near his Highness for that purpose.

That he should signifie to his Higness, in few Words, the Cause of his
coming, and then deliver into his Hands the Sovereign’s Letter.

That his Highness having receiv’d it, should break it open, and deliver
it back to the _Garter_ to be read; which he having done, should return
it to his Highness.

That, after this, he should proceed to the Investiture of his Highness
with the Ensigns of the Order.

Which being done, he briefly represented unto his Highness, in a
Speech, somewhat of the Quality and Splendor of the Order.

And, lastly, to kiss his Highness Hand, and so depart. And according to
those Proposals, and in the same Order, were all Things performed.


§ 6. The Sovereign of this most Noble Order defrays the Charges of the
_Garter_, whensoever, and as often as he is dispatch’d to any elect
Knight-Subject, either with Letters to signifie his Election, or to
invest him with the _Garter_ and _George_; and this is commonly
proportioned according to the length or the shortness of the Journey.
The Allowance for the Journey which Sir _Gilbert Dithick_, Garter, made
into the Counties of _Lincoln_ and _Cumberland_, first to the Earl of
_Rutland_, and then to the Lord _Scroop_, when Queen _Elizabeth_ was
Sovereign, appears to have been 20 _l._

Besides the Sovereign’s Allowance to the _Garter_, he receives
honourable Gratuities and Rewards from the elect Knight himself, after
he has performed the Investiture; and these have usually been
proportioned, according to the estimate of the Honour he receives, and
the particular affection he has for the Garter, and the service done by
him. Among whom, _Anno_ 17 _Henry_ VIII. we find the Earl of _Arundel_
bestow’d on _Thomas Wriothesley_, Garter, ten Pounds in Angelots, being
then at his Mannor of _Dawnley_; and _Ralph_ Earl of _Westmoreland_,
elected at the same Time with the aforesaid Earl, being at _Mile-end_,
gave to him six Pounds thirteen Shillings and four Pence. The Earl of
_Northumberland_, in the 23 of _Henry_ VIII. bestow’d on the Garter,
for the verbal certifying him of his Election, four Pounds, though he
went no farther than the Chapter-House Door.

Lastly, _Anno_ 26 _Elizabeth_, the Earl of _Rutland_ honourably
received the Garter at _Newark_, and the Lord _Scroop_ gave him thirty
Pounds in Gold, a Velvet Cloak, and a _Gallaway Nag_, and to _William
Dethick_, _York Herald_, who accompanied Garter to _Carlisle_, ten
Pounds.

But since these Times, the Knights elect have enlarged their gratuities
to Garter, for his Service upon this Occasion.




                                CAP. XI.

      _Of Preparations for the Personal Installation of a Knight._


§ 1. THE Inauguration of a Knight of this most Noble Order, consists in
a Conjunction of many Ceremonies, and contains the most solemn part of
those, which compleateth all the rest; and till this great Solemnity be
regularly and duly performed, the Person elected hath not the Honour to
be enrolled among the Number of Founders, but barely passes for an
elect Knight, and no other: For the Statute expresly says, That in Case
a Knight elect die before his Installation, He shall not be named one
of the Founders; and the reason assigned for it is, because he hath not
had the full Possession of his Estate, and in this Point do the other
Bodies of the Statutes agree. But when the Ceremonies of Installation
are compleatly finished, without all doubt the Knight is amply vested,
in Possession of all Honours and Privileges appertaining to the Founder
of this most Noble Order. But to spur up each elect Knight, who is
either a Subject to his Sovereign, or resides within the Realm, (and
consequently is better able to provide for Installment, than one
remaining in Foreign Parts,) for the completion of his Honour, or else
to wave the Act of Election, he has the space of one Year allowed him
by the Statutes for Installation, otherwise his Election is ordained to
be absolutely null and void: Nor can there be any Motive sufficient to
retard the Sovereign from proceeding to a new Election, unless the
elect Knight send or produce an Extenuation or Excuse for such his
delay, fit to be excepted by the Sovereign or his Deputy, and the whole
of that resplendent Body, or that the Sovereign himself think fit to
defer the Ceremony of Installation for some time longer. For which
reason, when certain Articles, tending to the Honour of the Order, had
been prepared by the Sovereign’s Lieutenant and ten Knights-Companions,
in a Chapter held the 24th of _April_, _Anno_ 21 _Jacobus_ I. ratified
by the Sovereign, and ordered to be observed; one of them was for
accelerating the Installation, after the Knight had been elected, yet
qualified with this Exception: _Unless for some special Cause the
Sovereign shou’d think fit to defer the same until the Eve or Day of
St._ George _next following, the Time of Election_.


§ 2. The Feast of Installation hath not been hitherto assigned to any
certain Period of Time, but has always depended upon the Will and
Pleasure of the Sovereign, to affix a convenient Day, which hath been
granted upon the request of the Knights elect, or some other of the
Knights-Companions, whose Favour and Esteem with the Sovereign was best
able to prevail; such a one do we find _Anno_ 35 _Elizabeth_; who, on
the behalf of the Earls of _Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_, obtained the
19th of _June_ the said Year, to be appointed for the Installation. It
sometimes happens, that though the Day of Installation be prefixed, yet
something extraordinary intervening, it hath been prorogued to a
farther and more convenient Season for the Sovereign’s Affairs. And the
most remarkable Instance is set down, _Anno_ 3 and 4 _Philip_ and
_Mary_, when the Earl of _Sussex_, the Lord _Grey_, and Sir _Robert
Rochester_, Knights elect, had their Installation, together with the
Feast of St. _George_, prorogued to the 10th of _May_ in the Year
aforesaid. But many urgent Affairs, relating both to the King and the
Queen, fell out about that time; not only the Grand Feast, but the
Solemnity of their Installation were prorogued to the 5th of
_December_, and stood so by several Prorogations, to the 20th of
_February_ next ensuing; yet it was ordered that the Earl of _Sussex_
shou’d be immediately installed, which was performed on the 8th of
_January_, and the Lord _Grey_ the 20th of _April_ following; but Sir
_Robert Rochester_ never obtained that Honour.

Though the time of Installation be arbitrary and uncertain, yet hath
the Place, from the first Institution of the Order, been appointed only
to the Sovereign’s Free Chapel of St. _George_, within whose Choice are
erected the Sovereigns and Knights-Companions Stalls, and under its
sacred Roof their Banners and Atchievements are affixed, as Monuments
of their high Merit, and so great Honour. For though the Celebration of
the Grand Feast of St. _George_, happened to be removed from _Windsor_,
by a Decree of the 1 _Elizabeth_; yet the Feast of the Installation was
excepted, and ordered to be Solemniz’d in that Place: For _Anno_ 21
_Jac._ I. it was provided among the Orders, _That after an Election
made of a Knight of the Order, his Installation shou’d be performed at_
Windsor, _according to the ancient Customs and Statutes of the Order_.
When the Sovereign hath been pleased to prefix a certain Day for this
Solemnity of Installation, there are several things to be obtained,
previous to it. (1.) A Commission to admit and instal the elect Knight.
(2.) Letters to each of the Commissioners, and the elect Knight, to
repair to _Windsor_. (3.) Warrants for the Sovereign’s Livery. (4.) A
Bill or Warrant for the removal of Stalls and Atchievements, all signed
by the Chancellor of the Order, with the Sign Manual of the Sovereign:
And lastly, the Knights own Preparations; among which his Atchievements
are to be ready to be hung up, as soon as he is installed.


§ 3. No elect Knight can be installed, unless by the Sovereign of the
Order himself, or by his Commission drawn up in Writing, and passed
under the Great-Seal of the Order, directed either to his Lieutenant or
Knights-Commissioners. There is but one Instance to be found, where the
Sovereign hath been pleased to Honour a Knight by installing of him
himself; and that was _Philip_ of _Castile_ and _Leon_, _Anno_ 22
_Henry_ VII. yet it is feasible enough that _Sigismond_ the Emperor,
and some other Foreign Princes of Rank and Eminence, might be installed
by other Sovereigns, though there’s no Memorial left upon Record. _In
reference to Installation by Commission, it was ordained by the
Statutes of Institution; That in Case the Sovereign shou’d be absent
out of the Kingdom, at the Time of Installation of any of the Knights,
so as he could not personally perform those things his Office obliged
him to, it shou’d be Lawful for him to Constitute, as his Deputy in
this Affair, whomsoever of the Society he shou’d think fit; and he to
have Power and Authority, in the Sovereign’s Name, to Perform and
Execute these Things, which it wou’d have been in his own part to have
done, had he been Present._ By Virtue of this Article, the Sovereign’s
Deputy, or Lieutenant, performed the Ceremony before the Reign of King
_Henry_ VIII. which was usually done at the Feast of St. _George_; but
in the Commission given out for Installation, formerly the Lieutenant
was first mentioned, and the Knights-Companions appointed for his
Assistance at the said Feast, were joined with him in the Commission
for Installation; but of late, the Commission hath passed to the
Lieutenant alone. King _Henry_ VIII. by his Statutes, enlarged the
Power of his Deputy, and they run to two or more of the
Knights-Companions, that shou’d Exercise the same by the Sovereign’s
Letters of Commission. And by the Privilege of this Article, whensoever
after, the Sovereign’s did Constitute an Installation, otherwise than
at the Feast of St. _George_, they then delegated their Authority to
such of the Knights-Companions as were judged most proper to perform
this Ceremony. The Year after the enacting this Statute, there’s a
Commission recorded to be issued out to the Marquiss of _Dorset_, and
the Earls of _Devonshire_ and _Kent_, to Instal the Lords _Ferrers_ of
_Chartley_, the substance of which is in our Annals. The particular
Powers these Commissions have granted to them, are to accept and admit
the Knight into the Order, to receive the Oath, and to Instal him; And
their general Power is, to effect and accomplish every Point which
belongs to his due Admittance, and plenary Instalment.


§ 4. Besides, the Commission impowering the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, or
Knights-Commissioners, therein nominated to the Installation of an
elect Knight, it hath been a matter frequent with the Sovereign, to
Issue out Letters of Summons under his privy Signet, both to the
Commissioners for Installation, and elect Knights, under the signet of
the Order; those to the Commissioners are directed severally to each,
nominated in the Commission; who are to give them notice of the
Instalment, and to require their repair to _Windsor_, against the Day
assigned, that they may proceed to their Installation. Those directed
to the elect Knights, pass likewise under the Sovereign’s Sign Manual,
and Signet of the Order; and if there be two or more Knights appointed
to be Installed on the same Day, the like Letter is sent to each of
them, the difference being only in the Direction.

Besides these Letters sent from the Sovereign, the Chancellor (if the
Sovereign be absent,) in his circular Letter to the Knights-Companions,
gives them an intimation of the designed Installation, upon the Feast
of St. _George_. And if the Feast be held either by the Sovereign or
his Lieutenant, he dispatcheth a Letter to the Prelate of the Order,
intimating the Sovereign’s Commands for his attendance at the Day
appointed; and if it be performed by Commissioners, he issues his
Letters to the three inferior Officers of the Order, purporting the
same Command; the conveyance of which appertains to the Garter, and are
left to his Care, and Trust, by the Constitutions relating to the
Order, whose allowances and rewards upon these and such like Services,
in their due Place, shall be considered.


§ 5. The third matter to be obtained by the Chancellor of the Order, is
the Sovereign’s Warrant, directed for the Master of the Great Wardrobe,
for the Time being, to deliver so much Velvet for the Livery of the
Order, as will make the Knight elect a Surcoat and Hood, and as much
Sarcenet or Taffety as will serve to line them: Of such a Warrant there
is an ancient Precedent in Latin, entered in the Black Book of the
Order; where it runs, _Nos ideo volumus & præcipimus, ut hinc
Tabellioni virgas Octodecem subrubri ostri de more tradas, cum tanto
albo serico, quanto vestimentum inde conficiendum infulciri poterit,
pro liverata (quam vocant) sua, &c._ There is likewise inserted another
Precedent in English of the like Nature, for the delivery of these
Materials to Sir _John Wallop_ Kt. elected _Anno_ 38 _Henry_ VIII. and
in the same Form run all the Warrants of Queen _Mary_ and Queen
_Elizabeth_.

Over and above these, there is a Warrant and Scheme prepared for the
Sovereign to Sign, wherein is described the Order of the Stalls of
_Windsor_, as he wou’d have them stand at the ensuing Election; by the
Virtue of which, the Garter is impowered to shift or remove the Plates
and Atchievements of the present Knights-Companions, so that room may
be made for the elect Knight, or Knights, and to fix the new Plates and
Atchievements within, and over the Stalls, in such order as they are
rank’d in the Scheme. As soon as the Sovereign’s Pleasure is known
concerning an Installation, Garter brings to the Chancellor of the
Order, the Names of the present Knights-Companions, placed in the order
they then fit in their Stalls, to the intent he may present them to the
Sovereign; who, upon observing the series wherein they stand already,
he may easier determine how to alter and place both them, and the new
elect Knights. _Anno_ 27 _Elizabeth_, the Office of the Garter being
Vacant, this employ was put upon the Clarenceux, and the Sovereign’s
Warrant for removal and placing of Plates and Atchievements, was
delivered to him, five Days before the Installation of the Earl of
_Rutland_, the Lords _Cobham_ and _Scroop_, who thereupon fixed them
according to the direction given; upon what Ground this alteration and
removal came to be made, and continues still in Vogue, though it was
otherwise at the Institution of the Order, wherein we must have
recourse to the Statutes, and the antique Practice grounded upon them:
Among the Statutes, those of the Institution did ordain, That if any
Earl, Baron, or Knight-Batchellor, shou’d depart this Life, he that
succeeded in his Place, of what Condition or State soever, shou’d
possess the same Stall which his Predecessor held before, without
changing: So that it might happen for an Earl, or a Duke, to succeed a
Knight, and, _vice versa_, it was thus at first constituted by _Edward_
III. _that it might be known who were the first Founders of this most
Noble Order_.

Now how punctually this Article of the Statutes hath been observed,
that none Chosen along time after the Institution of the Order, shou’d
interrupt or change this course, we shall demonstrate, conceiving it
very material to eye those Tables, yet preserved in the Chapter-House
in _Windsor_, wherein are collected the Names of all those
Knights-Companions who succeeded one another in each Stall, until the
beginning of _Henry_ VII’s Reign.

From which Series of Succession, we shall remark how exactly the Law in
this Point hath been observed, even to King _Henry_ VIII’s Reign, when
it received some alteration in this Point. For we find in the Annals
several Knights designed for the Stall of their immediate Predecessors,
by the Honour only of Election, although prevented of Installation by
Death, or other accidents; and the Statutes do not only bind him who
shall chance to attain the Honour of Installation, _but him who shall
succeed or come after the Defunct Knight_. First therefore we shall
Instance in Foreign Kings, among whom we find _Ericus_ King of
_Denmark_, to have received _Installation_ in _Henry_ V’s Reign, not
according to the State and Dignity of a King, but into the Stall of
that Knight-Companion whom he succeeded, _viz._ the Duke of _Bavaria_.
_John_ the first King of _Portugal_, a Knight and Companion, likewise
in _Henry_ V’s Time, was installed in the second Stall on the
Sovereign’s Side, which belong’d to _Henry_ Duke of _Lancaster_, his
first Predecessor: And to this King did succeed, in the same Stall, his
Son _Edward_ King of _Portugal_, _Anno_ 13 _Henry_ VI. to whose
Successor _Humphry_, _Anno_ 34, and _Casimir_ King of _Poland_ were
elected, _Anno_ 28 _Henry_ VI. into the sixth Stall on the Prince’s
side, at that Time vacant by the Death of the Duke _Conimbero_, whose
first Founder was Sir _John Mohun_. _Alphonsus_ King of _Arragon_ and
_Naples_, _Anno_ 38 _Henry_ VI. was elected into the Stall of _Don
Altro Vasques Dalmedea Count d’Averence_, being the seventh on the
Sovereign’s side, Sir _Hugh Courtney_ first possessing it. _Ferdinand_
King of _Naples_ and _Sicily_, elected _Anno_ 3 _Edward_ IV. was
installed on the third on the Prince’s side, _Ralph_ Earl of _Stafford_
having been first installed therein. And lastly, we find _Alphonsus_
King of _Sicily_ and _Jerusalem_, being elected by _Henry_ VII.
received his Installation on the Prince’s side, whose Predecessor was
_Thomas Beauchamp_ Earl of _Warwick_.

In the second Place, if we descend to Foreign Princes, it is
remarkable, that _William_ Duke of _Gueldres_, elected by _Richard_ II.
was installed in that which Sir _John Beauchamp_ possessed, and
_William_ Earl of _Holland_, _Haynalt_, and _Zealand_, in that which
appertained to Sir _John Chandos_. _Philip_ Duke of _Burgundy_, in the
Time of _Henry_ V. into the Stall of Sir _John Clifford_. And _Anno_ 28
_Henry_ VI. _Henry_ Duke of _Brunswick_ was elected into the Duke of
_Suffolk_’s Stall.

And as the Statute was carefully observed, with reference to the
Election and Installation of Foreign Princes, so no less in relation to
the Princes of the Blood at Home; among whom let us observe, in the
third Place, the ranking the Sons of the Founder of this most Noble
Order; where we see _Lyonel_ Duke of _Clarence_ his third Son, to have
been installed in the sixth Stall on the Sovereign’s side, whose
immediate Predecessor was Sir _John Beauchamp_: In like manner _John_
of _Gaunt_, Duke of _Lancaster_, his fourth Son was installed in the
seventh Stall on the Prince’s side, having Sir _Thomas Holland_ for his
Predecessor and a Founder: His fifth Son _Edmund Langley_, Duke of
_York_, possess’d the Stall Sir _Hugh Courtney_ did before: And the
sixth Son, _Thomas Woodstock_, Duke of _Gloucester_, enjoy’d the Stall
Sir _John Grey_ did before: This Rule was likewise observed strictly in
relation to the Sons of King _Henry_ VII.

If we review the aforesaid Tables, we shall find, that as the
Knights-Companions of higher Dignity assumed the Stalls, (when they
became vacant) though often of the lower sort, so some of the inferior
rank among them have had the Honour to be installed in Seats of a
superior Class, and this by the virtue and due of the Law.

Amongst these Knights-Companions we shall enumerate Sir _Philip la
Vache_, a _Gascon_, who, in the Reign of King _Richard_ II. was first
installed in the Prince’s Stall, (being vacant by the Death of _John_
of _Gaunt_,) though afterwards removed to the third Stall on the
Sovereign’s side. Sir _Nicholas Sarnesfield_, Standard-bearer to the
Founder, who succeeded _Hugh_ Earl of _Stafford_, and after him Sir
_William Arundel_, immediate Successor to Sir _Nicholas_, were both
installed in the second Stall on the Sovereign’s side: As likewise Sir
_John Robsart_, Sir _Gilbert Talbot_, and Sir _John Grey_, _&c._ were
installed in the second or third Stalls on the Sovereign’s side.

These Instances already asserted, are sufficient to manifest the Usage
and Practice, how the Knights-Companions have succeeded in the Stalls
of their immediate Predecessors, down to the Reign of _Henry_ VIII. and
was consonant and agreeable to the ancient Law of the Order.

But we are to observe, that tho’ each Knight was, by the
before-mentioned Article, constituted to succeed his immediate
Predecessor, in the Stall void by his Death, yet there’s an exception
as to that of the Prince of _Wales_. This Stall is the first on the
left Hand, at the entrance into the Choir of St. _George_’s _Chappel_
at _Windsor_, and wherein _Edward_ the Black Prince was installed; from
this Stall does the whole range of Stalls on the same side take their
Denomination, and to which the Prince of _Wales_, as soon as he is
elected into the Order, hath a due Title. Though this Stall _de Jure_
appertains to that Prince, yet heretofore, when the Sovereign had no
Heir, then was it for the present disposed to some other Knight,
otherwise a defect in the full Number of Knights-Companions would have
ensued.

The first that obtained that Honour, (besides the Prince of _Wales_,)
was _John_ of _Gaunt_, Duke of _Lancaster_, decreed him by K. _Richard_
II. who never had Issue, and removed from the seventh Stall thither.
But the first Companion that happened to be installed in it, was Sir
_Philip la Vache_ just mentioned, which was a great Honour done to one
of his Rank: But it fell to him by the then Law of the Order, being
elected into the Room of the said Duke, who died possessed of it. But
King _Henry_ IV. coming to the Crown, and his eldest Son being created
Prince of _Wales_, laid claim to the Stall by Virtue of that Statute,
and had it assigned to him. Nevertheless, that the former Possessor
might suffer as little diminution as might be in the Honour of his
Session, he was removed no lower than to the Stall which King _Henry_
IV. lately held, when he was Earl of _Derby_.

Upon the Death of _Henry_ IV. _Henry_ V. being Sovereign, Sir _John
Dabrichcourt_ supplyed the vacancy, and was installed therein; and he
dying in the fifth Year of that King possess’d thereof, his Plate
continues in that Stall to this Day, and the Emperor _Sigismond_
succeeds Sir _John Dabrichcourt_ in the Prince’s Stall.

Some few Years before King _Henry_ VI. died, he had a Son Born; and
though the Emperor _Frederick_ was elected into the Order, _Anno_ 35
_Henry_ VI. yet was that Stall reserved for the Prince, (though he
never possess’d it) and the Emperor 37 _Henry_ VI. was installed by
Proxy in the Duke of _Somerset_’s Stall, then lately deceased.

In _Edward_ IV’s Reign, the right of this Stall returned again to
_Edward_ his Son, the Prince of _Wales_, and in _Henry_ VII’s, to
Prince _Arthur_, but upon his Death, to _Maximilian_, Son of
_Frederick_ King of the _Romans_, and after Emperor, enjoyed it. So did
the Emperor _Charles_ V. (his Grandchild,) in regard there was no Son
as yet Born to the Sovereign.

But Prince _Edward_ being Born, while the Stall was possessed by
_Charles_ V. it chanc’d likewise that the King of the _Scots_ died,
which caus’d King _Henry_ VIII. to reserve his Stall for that Prince,
although he never had Possession of it, or was elected into the Order,
though we find him once registred in a Scrutiny. King _Henry_ VIII.
dying, Prince _Edward_ became, both by Inheritance and Succession,
Sovereign of this most Noble Order.

From this Time, to the eighth Year of King _James_ I. there was no
Prince of _Wales_, who finding the Prince’s Stall vacant, at his
entrance upon the English Throne, did in a Chapter in the first Year of
his Reign, advance the French King _Henry_ IV. from the second Stall on
the Sovereign’s side, into it; and appointed Prince _Henry_ to be
installed in that King’s void Seat, where he continued till _Anno_ 3
_Jac._ I. that _Christierne_ IV. King of _Denmark_, came to be
installed by Proxy, and the Prince was moved lower to make way for him,
though he was Senior both by Election and Installation. _Anno_ 9 _Jac._
I. upon the Death of the French King, not the Prince, whose Right it
was, since he was created Prince of _Wales_, but the said King of
_Denmark_, was translated to the vacant Stall; and hereupon Prince
_Henry_ was returned again to the second Stall on the Sovereign’s side,
which he enjoyed as long as he survived, and upon his Death, Prince
_Charles_ was removed into it, and there remained all King _James_’s
Reign.

When King _Charles_ II. came to be installed, the Sovereign finding him
prevented from assuming the Prince’s Stall, the King of _Denmark_ being
yet alive, assigned to him the second Stall on the Sovereign’s side,
(wherein himself sat whilst Prince of _Wales_,) and where hitherto his
Plate remains as a fixed Memorial of his Installation therein.

Although it has been made apparent, that the _Knights-Companions_, at
their Election or Installation, succeeded the immediate _defunct
Knight_ in his Stall, yet we may observe, that sometimes after
Installation, as an especial signal of Favour and Indulgence, the
Sovereign hath been pleased, though very rarely, to advance a
_Knight-Companion_ to a higher Stall than that wherein he was first
placed; and though there be no such Permission granted by the Law of
the Order, yet we find _John_ of _Gaunt_, Duke of _Lancaster_, removed
from the seventh Stall on the Prince’s side, to the Prince’s Stall it
self, and it’s said to be done by the Decree of the Sovereign and the
_Knights-Companions_. And no doubt but as this was done by so good
Authority, and so upon no less enducements to the Sovereign, and the
whole Society. We shall here mention a few of these extraordinary
Cases. _William Henalt_, Earl of _Ostervant_, was advanced by King
_Richard_ II. from the eleventh Stall on the Sovereign’s side, to the
Duke of _Britain_’s, being the second on the Prince’s side. _Humphry_
Duke of _Gloucester_, in the Reign of King _Henry_ VI. was removed from
the eleventh Stall on the Sovereign’s side, to the second on the same
side; and _Richard Nevil_, Earl of _Warwick_, by the Consent of the
_Knights-Companions_ in Chapter, _Anno_ 39 _Henry_ VI. was translated
to the Duke of _Buckingham_’s Stall; the Lord _Bonvil_, to the Lord
_Scales_’s Seat; Sir _Thomas Kyriell_, to the Place of the Earl of
_Shrewsbury_; and the Lord _Wenlock_, to the Stall of Viscount
_Beaumont_. But King _Henry_ VIII. thinking it requisite for the
Sovereign of this most Noble Order, to be impowered by a General, how
to Act that at Pleasure, which the former Sovereigns did not, but by
the Power of particular Acts, or Orders, in the Chapter; after he had
confirmed the ancient Law of succeeding in the Stall of the immediate
Predecessor, and not to suffer an alteration without the Sovereign’s
Licence, in the next Article he established this Privilege upon Himself
and Successors: _That if there were any Place or Stall void, the
Sovereign, at his own Pleasure, might Advance and Translate any Knight
of the Society into the void Stall, so that it were higher than that,
wherein he sate before_.

This in Effect did vacat the ancient Law of succeeding in
Stalls, though at the same Time he seem’d to Confirm it to the
_Knights-Subjects_, for afterwards Translations preceeding to
Installations, became so frequent, that the Right an _elect Knight_
had to his Predecessor’s Stall, was seldom enjoyed. However, hereby
he confirmed a Power to gratify such of the _Knights-Companions_,
as he shou’d think fit to advance, without having recourse to a
Chapter; and from hence began the Custom to Issue out Warrants,
under the Sovereign’s _Sign Manual_, for the Translation of
Stalls, and consequently the alteration and removal of such of the
_Knights-Companions Helms_, _Crests_, _Banners_, and _Plates_, who
shou’d receive a higher Exaltation.

Besides the Power established upon the Sovereigns of this most Noble
Order, of translating Stalls, when a vacancy happened, they farther
added this larger Prerogative: That the Sovereign, once in his Life,
might, if it pleased him, make a general Translation of all the Stalls
at his Pleasure, except of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Dukes, who
shou’d keep their Stalls and Places, unless advanced to a higher Room
and Stall. In which Translation, the long continuance in the Order, and
the Praises, Worthiness, and Merits of the _Knights-Companions_, were
to be considered and remembred.

But this Branch of the Sovereign’s Prerogative, as far as we can find,
was never put in Execution, though the Translation, _Anno_ 27 _Henry_
VIII. border’d something upon it, perhaps lest it might raise too great
Feuds among the _Knights-Subjects_; forasmuch as that of translating
only, (when there happened a vacancy,) begot great Emulations, which at
length introduced a Change, to which we shall pass, after we have taken
notice of a Clause added in the twenty second Article of King _Henry_
VIII’s Statutes, relating to Princes.

It is observable the ancient Law of succeeding in Stalls, in relation
to them, was wholly altered. For King _Henry_ VIII. upon the
Establishment of his Body of Statutes, not only appointed those
Strangers, then present of the Order, to be seated next himself; but
that all Emperors, Kings, and Princes, should hold their Stalls after
their Estates, and the very next unto the Sovereign, tho’
_Knights-Subjects_, upon vacancy, become removable at Pleasure.

For this reason, the Emperor _Maximilian_ II. and after him _Rudolph_
II. his Son, had the Prince’s Stalls assigned them after their Election
into the Order; and several of the Kings of _France_ were placed in the
next below, being the second on the Sovereign’s side. And when there
chanced to be more than one King at a time in the Order, the second
Stall on the Prince’s side was assigned him; for Precedency was
measured now by Dignity and State, and not by the Antiquity of the
Order; As appears from the King of _Bohemia_, _Anno_ 19 _Henry_ VIII.
and the King of _Spain_, _Anno_ 8 _Elizabeth_, Princes Strangers,
according to their regality, and illustrious extraction, had their
Scituation next to Kings, as is manifest from the Dukes of _Savoy_,
_Montmorency_, and _Holstein_, _Anno_ 3 _Elizabeth_, and _Frederick_
Prince _Palatine_, and _Maurice_ Prince of _Orange_, _Anno_ 11 _Jac._ I.

But notwithstanding these Assignments of Stalls to Strangers, they were
nevertheless subject to removal, sometimes to Stalls higher than their
own, upon the Death of a Stranger, who died possessed of a superior
one; and sometimes again to others lower, for the advancing a Knight of
greater Degree and Distinction, where the upper Stalls were already
supplied; else they could not be so ranked, according to their
respective Quality, as the Statutes enjoyn; nor indeed wou’d any
Stranger King have accepted of an Election, unless he was placed in a
distinguishable Stall, suitable to his Dignity. _Ferdinand_, Emperor of
_Germany_, is an instance of Advancement in translation of Stalls; for
after the Death of the Emperor _Charles_ V. his Brother, he was
advanced from the second Stall on the Prince’s side, into the Prince’s
Stall. And _Henry_ IV. of _France_, from the second on the Sovereign’s
side, to the Prince’s Stall, and _Christierne_ IV. King of _Denmark_,
_Anno_ 9 _Jac._ I.

Among Princes Strangers, we find _Emanuel_ Duke of _Savoy_, advanced
from the third on the Prince’s side, to the second on the same side,
_Anno_ 2 _Elizabeth_; and _Frederick_ Prince Palatine, _Anno_ 1
_Charles_ I. was advanced from the second of the Prince’s, to the
second on the side of the Sovereign; likewise _Henry Frederick_, Prince
of _Orange_; was advanced from the third of the Sovereign’s, to the
second of the Prince’s, upon the Death of the King of _Sweden_, _Anno_
10 _Charles_ I.

When the _French_ King _Charles_ IX. was elected, _Anno_ 6 _Elizabeth_,
the superior Stalls were already filled with Strangers, and there was
no Expedient left to give him the Stall the Sovereign design’d him, but
by the removal of some of those _Knights-Strangers_ lower; and upon
this, _Emanuel_ Duke of _Savoy_ was displaced to the third on the
Sovereign’s side.

But the _French_ King was not installed, until the 16th of _January_,
_Anno_ 8 _Elizabeth_, and before that it was concluded to remove the
King of _Spain_ to the Duke of _Savoy_’s Stall, as void before, and to
instal the _French_ King in the King of _Spain_’s, which was
accordingly done; so that upon this occasion, there were four
Strangers, and five _Knights-Subjects_, removed lower, to make way for
the _French_ King.

The 20th of _April_, _Anno_ 2 _Jac._ I. The Duke of _Wirtemberg_ was
installed in the third Stall on the Prince’s side, and the Year
following advanced to a higher.

The 26th of _May_ ensuing, _Ulerick_ Duke _Holst_, had assigned unto
him that Stall from which the Duke of _Wirtemberg_ was advanced: But
against the Installation of _Christierne_, the fourth King of
_Denmark_, the Duke was removed back to his Seat, wherein he was
installed, and the Duke advanced into the vacant one. All which will
appear more conspicuous, from the appointment of Stalls on these
Occasions, which follow.


A remove of _Banners_ and _Plates_, at the Installation of _Frederick_
  Duke of _Wirtemberg_, _Anno Jac._ I. _Reg._ 2.

_JAMES Rex._

           1. _The Sovereign_       1. _The_ French _King_
           2. _The Prince_          2. _Void_
           3. _Earl of_ Nottingham  3. _Duke of_ Wirtemberg
           4. _Earl of_ Ormond      4. _Earl of_ Dorset
           5. _Earl of_ Shrewsbury  5. _Earl of_ Cumberland
           6. _Earl of_ Northumber. 6. _Earl of_ Worcester
           7. _Lord_ Sheffeild      7. _Earl of_ Suffolk
           8. _Earl of_ Devonshire  8. _Sir_ Henry Lea
           9. _Earl of_ Sussex      9. _Lord_ Scroop
           10. _Earl of_ Derby      10. _Lord_ Burleigh
           11. _Duke of_ Lenox      11. _Earl of_ Southampton
           12. _Earl of_ Marr       12. _Earl of_ Pembrook
           13. _Void_               13. _Void_


The Order of Stalls at the Feast of St. _George_, _Anno Jac._ I. _Reg._
  3.

_JAMES Rex._

           1. _The Sovereign_       1. _The_ French _King_
           2. _The Prince_          2. _Void_
           3. _Duke of_ Wirtemberg  3. _Earl of_ Nottingham
           4. _Earl of_ Ormond      4. _Earl of_ Dorset
           5. _Earl of_ Shrewsbury  5. _Earl of_ Cumberland
           6. _Earl of_ Northumber. 6. _Earl of_ Worcester
           7. _Lord_ Sheffeild      7. _Earl of_ Suffolk
           8. _Earl of_ Devonshire  8. _Sir_ Henry Lea
           9. _Earl of_ Sussex      9. _Lord_ Scroop
           10. _Earl of_ Derby      10. _Lord_ Burleigh
           11. _Duke of_ Lenox      11. _Earl of_ Southampton
           12. _Earl of_ Marr       12. _Earl of_ Pembrook
           13. _Void_               13. _Void_


A remove of _Banners_ and _Plates_, at the Installation of _Christian_
  IV. King of _Denmark_, the 8th of _September_, _Anno Jac._ I. _Reg._
  3.

_JAMES Rex._

          1. _The Sovereign_        1. _The_ French _King_
          2. _The King of_ Denmark  2. _The Prince_
          3. _Duke of_ Holst        3. _Duke of_ Wirtemberg
          4. _Earl of_ Nottingham   4. _Earl of_ Ormond
          5. _Earl of_ Dorset       5. _Earl of_ Shrewsbury
          6. _Earl of_ Cumberland   6. _Earl of_ Northumber.
          7. _Earl of_ Worcester    7. _Lord_ Sheffeild
          8. _Earl of_ Suffolk      8. _Earl of_ Devonshire
          9. _Sir_ Henry Lea        9. _Earl of_ Sussex
          10. _Lord_ Scroop         10. _Earl of_ Derby
          11. _Earl of_ Exeter      11. _Duke of_ Lenox
          12. _Earl of_ Southampton 12. _Earl of_ Marr
          13. _Earl of_ Pembrook    13. _Earl of_ Northampton


In this last Scheme, we find Prince _Henry_ removed from the second on
the Sovereign’s, to the second on the Prince’s side, to make room for
the King of _Denmark_. And tho’ the Duke _Chevereux_, _Anno_ 3
_Charles_ I. was advanced from the third Stall on the Sovereign’s side,
to the second on the Prince’s side, that became vacant by the Death of
the Duke of _Brunswick_; yet the Year after, upon the admission of
_Gustavus Adolphus_, King of _Sweden_, he was removed two Stalls lower,
and the Prince Elector Palatine one.

We pass on now from the removal and translation of a _Knight-Subject_,
after he had been installed, to the assignment of his Stall, at the
Time of the Installation it self; where it is worthy of Remark, That on
the 24th of _April_, _Anno_ 6 _Elizabeth_, in lieu of the ancient Law,
which appointed each elect Knight to succeed in the Stall of his
Predecessor, a new one was introduced, being composed, as was
conceived, upon a more just level than the former, and as far as was
possible, to extinguish all danger that might arise from Emulation. The
Words are: _That all Knights, who for the future were admitted into the
Society of the Order, should take and be installed in the lowest Stall,
according to the Course and Seniority of their Election, except only
Stranger Kings and Princes_.

Upon which it chanced, that when a _Knight-Subject_ elect was to be
installed, all the _Knights-Companions_, between him and the vacant
Stall, were removed higher, that the space might be supplied: And if
two or more were to be installed together, they possessed the lowest
Stalls, according to the Seniority of their Election. And though the
manner and order in removals, is become a thing of course, and rendered
familiar and easy; yet it cannot be effected, or the Atchievements,
Banners, or Plates, displaced, unless by a Warrant issued from the
Sovereign, to justify the Garter for such his removals; which will
plainly appear by the insertion of these Schemes.


            The Order of Stalls, as they stood at the Feast
                   of St. _George_, _Anno_ 29 _Eliz._

_ELIZABETH Regina._

         1. _The Sovereign_       1. _Void_
         2. _The_ French _King_   2. _The King of_ Spain
         3. _The King of_ Denmark 3. _Void_
         4. _Duke_ John Casimire  4. _Void_
         5. _Viscount_ Mountague  5. _Earl of_ Leicester
         6. _Earl of_ Shrewsbury  6. _Earl of_ Warwick
         7. _Lord_ Hunsdon        7. _Void_
         8. _Void_                8. _Earl of_ Worcester
         9. _Earl of_ Huntington  9. _Lord_ Burleigh
         10. _Lord Grey_          10. _Earl of_ Derby
         11. _Earl of_ Pembrook   11. _Ld._ How. _of_ Effingh.
         12. _Void_               12. _Lord_ Cobham
         13. _Lord_ Scroop        13. _Void_


             A Translation of Stalls made against the Feast
                   of Installation, _Anno_ 30 _Eliz._

_ELIZABETH Regina._

        1. _The Sovereign_         1. _Void_
        2. _The_ French _King_     2. _The King of_ Spain
        3. _The King of_ Denmark   3. _Void_
        4. _Duke_ John Casimire    4. _Void_
        5. _Viscount_ Mountague    5. _Earl of_ Leicester
        6. _Earl of_ Shrewsbury    6. _Earl of_ Warwick
        7. _Lord_ Hunsdon          7. _Earl of_ Worcester
        8. _Earl of_ Huntington    8. _Lord_ Burleigh
        9. _Lord_ Grey             9. _Earl of_ Derby
        10. _Earl of_ Pembrook     10. _Ld._ How. _of_ Effingh.
        11. _Lord_ Cobham          11. _Lord_ Scroop
        12. _Earl of_ Essex        12. _Earl of_ Ormond
        13. _Sir_ Christop. Hatton 13. _Void_


The first of these Schemes plainly evince, how the Stalls were ranked
on St. _George_’s-_Eve_, _Anno_ 29 _Elizabeth_, and the other how
modelled against the Installation of the Earls of _Essex_ and _Ormond_,
and that of Sir _Christopher Hatton_, the 23d of _May_, _Anno_ 30
_Elizabeth_, which demonstrates those three elect Knights appear to be
installed in the lowermost Stalls, (as the last mentioned Decree
enjoyns,) and by reason the Earl of _Essex_, and Sir _Christopher
Hatton_, were settled on the Sovereign’s side, the vacancy in the
eighth and twelfth Stalls of the same side became filled up; the Earl
of _Huntington_ being advanced into the eighth, the Lord _Grey_ in the
ninth, and the Earl of _Pembrook_ in the tenth Stall, by the advance of
the Earl of _Worcester_ into the seventh on the Prince’s side, the
vacancy is there supplyed, and the other Knights seated below him, by a
like removal, left the twelfth Stall for the Earl of _Ormond_, and the
thirteenth void.

The same Order was observ’d by King _James_, as appears by another
Scheme of the Stalls settled on the 3d of _July_, _Anno_ 1 _Jac._ I. at
the Election of the Duke of _Lenox_, the Earls of _Northampton_,
_Marr_, and _Pembrook_.


           Stalls altered at a Chapter held at _Windsor_, the
                      3 _July_, _Anno_ 1 _Jac._ I.

_JAMES Rex._

          1. _The Sovereign_        1. _The_ French _King_
          2. _The Prince_           2. _Void_
          3. _Earl of_ Nottingham   3. _Void_
          4. _Earl of_ Ormond       4. _Lord_ Buckhurst
          5. _Earl of_ Salop        5. _Earl of_ Cumberland
          6. _Earl of_ Northumberl. 6. _Earl of_ Worcester
          7. _Lord_ Sheffeild       7. _Ld._ How. _of_ Walden
          8. _Lord_ Hunsdon         8. _Lord_ Montjoy
          9. _Sir_ Henry Lea        9. _Earl of_ Sussex
          10. _Lord_ Cobham         10. _Lord_ Scroop
          11. _Earl of_ Derby       11. _Lord_ Burleigh
          12. _Duke of_ Lenox       12. _Earl of_ Southampton
          13. _Earl of_ Marr        13. _Earl of_ Pembrook


From hence it is evident, that these elect Knights were installed
in the lowest Stalls, and so continued throughout the series of his
Reign, and since, except the Prince of _Wales_, and _Charles_ Duke of
_York_, Sons to the said Sovereign: For the Prince was installed on the
second on the Sovereign’s side, and upon that Election of the Duke
of _York_, _Anno Jac._ I. the second Stall on the Prince’s side was
assigned him, and the Morrow after St. _George_’s _Day_, upon which
he was elected, he made a solemn Progression to the Chapel, in order
to take Possession of it. Upon _Whitsunday_ following, at a serious
Debate, it was determined in Chapter, that notwithstanding he was the
Sovereign’s Son, yet he shou’d have no more Preheminence than other
_Knights-Companions_, and that his Atchievements, which had been set
up over the second Stall on the Prince’s side, shou’d be removed to
that Stall next above the Viscount _Rochester_’s, and to be conserted
with the Earl of _Montgomery_, before whom he had the Preference, on
_Whitsun-Munday_, as they proceeded to the Chapter-House, in order
to their Installation. And where it was farther Decreed, _That all
Princes not Absolute, shou’d be installed thenceforth in the Prince’s
Place_. But after this had passed, Endeavours were used to advance
the Duke into the Stall he was first appointed to, and the Kings of
Arms were consulted upon this Point; who certified, that _Richard_
Duke of _York_, second Son to King _Edward_ IV. was installed in the
fourth Stall on the Prince’s side, and had Precedence of the Duke of
_Suffolk_, and the Earls of _Dowglass_ and _Essex_, who were elected
long before him: That _Henry_ Duke of _York_, second Son to King
_Henry_ VII. was installed in the third Stall on the Sovereign’s side,
and had the Preference of the Duke of _Buckingham_, and the Earls of
_Oxford_ and _Derby_, his Seniors; and in the last Place, that _Henry
Fitz Roy_, Duke of _Richmond_, base Son of King _Henry_ VIII. had Place
and Precedence before the Dukes of _Norfolk_ and _Suffolk_, and other
_Knights-Companions_. Upon which Grounds it was thought requisite that
the Issue of the Sovereign should enjoy the same Privileges in this
Affair, as those Princes that were Strangers; and therefore at another
Chapter assembled at _White-Hall_, on _Easter-Monday_, being the 13th
of _April_, _Anno_ 10 _Jac._ I. the Order which passed the Year before,
for making the Duke a Puisne, was abrogated, and he was translated to
the second Stall on the Prince’s side, and paired with Prince _Henry_,
as may be seen by the Stalls then settled, and entered into the Blue
Book of the Order.

We need not bring any more corroborating Circumstances of the
Observation of the Chapter Act, made _Anno_ 6 _Elizabeth_, as it
relates to _Knights-Subjects_, which has been punctually performed; but
since Strangers are therein excepted, it will not be amiss to note,
that the Rule and Practice continued as was established by King _Henry_
VIII. _viz._ that they were installed in Seats next to the Sovereign,
according to the illustriousness of their Dignity and Birth.

We shall mention one Instance, of the manner of placing both Strangers
and Knights-Subjects at one and the same Time. At the first coming of
King _Charles_ I. to the Crown, there were of both Conditions to be
installed in one Day, to wit, the Duke of _Brunswick_ a Stranger
Prince, the Earls of _Salisbury_ and _Carlisle_, _Knights-Subjects_,
elected by King _James_ I. in the 22d Year of his Reign, and on the
15th of _May_ following, the Earls of _Dorset_ and _Holland_ were
elected with the Viscount _Andover_, and the Duke of _Chevereux_ the
4th of _July_ after. And when the removal of Stalls was propounded for
the Admission of these seven elect Knights, it was agreed too, that the
Dukes of _Brunswick_ and _Chevereux_ shou’d be installed in the
uppermost Stall among Strangers, as King _Henry_ VIII. had before
ordained, but the _Knights-Subjects_ in the lowermost Stalls, according
to the pristine Practice, as appears from the Decree, _Anno_ 6
_Elizabeth_, and from the settlement of Stalls then made, and thus
intituled. ·


A remove of _Banners_ and _Stalls_, at the Feast of St. _George_, and
  Installation holden at _Windsor_, the 13, 14, 15 Days of _December_,
  _Anno_ 1625. At which time were installed the Dukes of _Brunswick_,
  and _Chevereux_, the Earls of _Salisbury_, _Carlisle_, _Holland_,
  _Dorset_, and the Viscount _Andover_, as follows.

_CHARLES Rex._

          1. _The Sovereign_       1. _The King of_ Denmark
          2. _The Prince Palatine_ 2. _The Duke of_ Brunswick
          3. _Duke_ Chevereux      3. _Earl of_ Northumberl.
          4. _Earl of_ Worcester   4. _Lord_ Sheffeild
          5. _Earl of_ Suffolk     5. _Earl of_ Sussex
          6. _Earl of_ Darby       6. _Earl of_ Marr
          7. _Earl of_ Pembrook    7. _Earl of_ Montgomery
          8. _Earl of_ Arundel     8. _Earl of_ Somerset
          9. _Earl of_ Kelly       9. _Viscount_ Wallingford
          10. _Earl of_ Rutland    10. _Duke of_ Buckingham
          11. _Earl of_ Leicester  11. _Earl of_ Salisbury
          12. _Earl of_ Carlisle   12. _Earl of_ Dorset
          13. _Earl of_ Holland    13. _Viscount_ Andover


After the Restauration of King _Charles_ II. to his Crown and Kingdoms,
when several _Knights-Companions_, both Strangers and Subjects, were to
be installed, a Debate arose in the Chapter held at _White-Hall_, the
10th of _April_, _Anno_ 13 _Car._ II. about placing their Atchievements
over their Stalls; upon which the following Order was issued out.


CHARLES Rex.

_Whereas divers elect Knights and Companions of our most Noble Order of
the Garter are, by our special Appointment, to be installed in the
Chapel of our Castle of_ Windsor, _upon the 15th Day of this Instant;
and that some of them who are Strangers, do not as yet, nor are likely
to appear, either in their own Persons, or by their sufficient Proxies
at the said Instalment, and so might run the hazard to lose the Benefit
and Advantage of their Pre-election, in Point of Rank and Precedency,
in respect of some of our Subject-Knights, who, though since elected,
will be first installed, without some Expedient taken therein to
prevent it. There being no reason, (nor is it our intention) that those
noble Persons shou’d suffer that prejudice, for want of that usual
formality, and for which they are not in the fault, but others, who,
according to the Statutes and ancient Custom, were to give timely
Advertisement to the said Foreign elected Knights, and to Summon them
by themselves or Proxies, to assist at the said Instalment: Our Will
and Pleasure is, you proceed forthwith to the placing of the Hatchments
of all the respective Knights and Companions of our said Order, whether
installed or elect, Subject or Stranger, over the Stalls, which we do
in manner as followeth assign, and appoint them in our aforesaid
Chappel._


        1. _The Sovereign_            1. _Void_
        2. _The Duke of_ York         2. _The Elector Palatine_
        3. _Prince Elector of_ Brand. 3. _Prince of_ Orange
        4. _Prince_ Rupert            4. _Prince_ Edward
        5. _Earl of_ Salisbury        5. _Earl of_ Barkshire
        6. _Earl of_ Northumberl.     6. _Duke of_ Espernon
        7. _Duke of_ Ormond           7. _Duke of_ Buckingham
        8. _Earl of_ Southampton      8. _Marquiss of_ Newcastle
        9. _Earl of_ Bristol          9. _Prince_ Tarente
        10. _Count_ Marshin           10. _Duke of_ Albermarle
        11. _Earl of_ Sandwich        11. _Earl of_ Oxford
        12. _Duke of_ Richmond        12. _Earl of_ Lindsey
        13. _Earl of_ Manchester      13. _Earl of_ Strafford


_And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant, any Statute,
or Custom, to the contrary notwithstanding: Given under the Signet of
our said Order, at our Court at_ White-Hall, _the_ 10th _of_ April,
1666.

 To our Trusty and Well-beloved
  Servant, Sir _Edward        _By the Sovereign’s Command_
  Walker_, Kt. Garter, and
  Principal King of Arms,                 Hen. de Vic.
  of our most Noble Order
  of the Garter.


By which we find the Stranger Princes are placed in the upper Stall,
nearest the Sovereign, according to their Dignities and Degrees, and
all the _Knights-Subjects_ as to the Time of their Elections. It is to
be observed upon this Settlement, that though the Earl of _Southampton_
did not receive his Garter and George, till the Sovereign, upon his
happy arrival in _England_, conferred it upon him with his own Hand;
yet, according to the Time of the Election, Place and Precedency were
allowed him; which was in _January_, _An. Dom._ 1649. in the Isle of
_Jersey_, some few Days before Duke _Hamilton_ and the Marquiss of
_Newcastle_ were elected.

It was ordered by the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_, convened in
Chapter on the 10th of _January_, _Anno_ 14 _Car._ II. _That
thenceforward all Princes Strangers, of what Condition soever, shou’d
have Precedence among themselves, according to the Seniority of their
Elections and Installations_. Upon which the Sovereign, under the
Signet of the Order, authorized the Garter, upon the 30th of _March_,
to set up their Atchievements in St. _George_’s _Chapel_, in the Order
here exhibited.


_CHARLES Rex._

        1. _The Sovereign_          1. _Void_
        2. _Duke of_ York           2. _Prince Elector Palatine_
        3. _Prince_ Rupert          3. _Prince of_ Orange
        4. _Elector of_ Brandenbur. 4. _Prince of_ Denmark
        5. _Earl of_ Salisbury      5. _Earl of_ Barkshire
        6. _Earl of_ Northumberl.   6. _Duke of_ Ormond
        7. _Duke of_ Buckingham     7. _Earl of_ Southampton
        8. _Marquiss of_ Newcastle  8. _Earl of_ Bristol
        9. _Prince_ Tarente         9. _Count_ Marshin
        10. _Duke of_ Albermarle    10. _Earl of_ Sandwich
        11. _Earl of_ Oxford        11. _Duke of_ Richmond
        12. _Earl of_ Lindsey       12. _Earl of_ Manchester
        13. _Earl of_ Strafford     13. _Duke of_ Monmouth


But upon mature Consideration of a Law made by _Henry_ VIII. for
placing of Strangers, and for another founded by Queen _Elizabeth_ for
_Knights-Subjects_; the Sovereign, by the consent of the most Noble
Companions present, at a Chapter held the 19th of _November_, 1699. was
pleased to Ordain, first, _That the Prince of_ Wales, _and such
Emperors and Kings that shou’d be of the Order, shou’d be placed in the
nearest Stalls to that of the Sovereign, according to their Elections
and Installations_.

Then, _That all other Sovereign Princes, and Princes of the Blood,
shou’d be placed in their Stalls next_ unto the King’s, _according to
the Seniority, in the Order_. And thirdly, That all other his Majesty’s
Subjects and Strangers, not of the Dignity above-mention’d, shou’d be
installed in the lowest Stalls, according to their Antiquity in the
Order, and the ancient Practice.

And whereas the Stall termed the Prince’s had been long vacant, the
Sovereign King _Charles_ II. by the advice of the most Noble
Companions, at the same Chapter, was pleased to order, _That the
present King of_ Sweden _shou’d, by his Proxy, be placed in that Stall,
and his Atchievements hung up thereon accordingly, in convenient Time_.
Which order was strictly put in Execution, and the Stalls at the Feast
of St. _George_, _Anno_ 23 _Car._ II. were thus ranged.


_CHARLES Rex._

        1. _The Sovereign_           1. _The King of_ Sweden
        2. _King of_ Denmark         2. _The Duke of_ York
        3. _Prince Elector Palatine_ 3. _Prince_ Rupert
        4. _Prince of_ Orange        4. _Elector of_ Brandenbur.
        5. _Pr. Elector of_ Saxony   5. _Duke of_ Ormond
        6. _Duke of_ Buckingham      6. _Duke of_ Newcastle
        7. _Earl of_ Bristol         7. _Prince_ Tarante
        8. _Count_ Marshin           8. _Earl of_ Sandwich
        9. _Earl of_ Oxford          9. _Duke of_ Richmond
        10. _Earl of_ Strafford      10. _Duke of_ Monmouth
        11. _Duke of_ Albermarle     11. _Void_
        12. _Void_                   12. _Void_
        13. _Void_                   13. _Void_


§ 7. Having dispatch’d the ancient Law of Succession into void Stalls,
and of Translation from one to another; we come now to consider what is
farther to be prepared for the Knight elect, against the Day of the
great Solemnity, at his own Expence; the chief of which are;


           1. A Mantle or upper Robe, with its Appurtenance.
           2. A Collar of the Garter and Great George.
           3. A Cap of black Velvet, adorned with Plumes.
           4. A Helmet, Crest, Mantlings, and Sword.
           5. A Banner of his Arms.
           6. A Plate of his Arms and Stile.
           7. A Cushion, to carry his Robes and Collar upon.
           8. Lodging Escutcheons.


Though the Kirtle on the Surcoat was anciently given by the King to the
_Knights-Subjects_, yet we do not find the Mantle of the Order was, nor
indeed of a later Date, unless now and then, as a distinguishing mark
of Favour. But the Sovereign always bestows the Mantle upon Strangers,
as well as the whole Habit, when he has elected them into the Society
of the Order. And upon sending of the whole Habit over by Garter to the
King of _Portugal_, _Anno_ 13 _Hen._ VI. the Mantle, Surcoat, and Hood,
were accompted for in the Great Wardrobe, and is to this Day practised.

However of late the Sovereign hath been pleased, now and then, to
confer the Mantle upon a _Knight-Subject_. Witness King _James_ I.
_Anno_ 21. did to _James_ Marquiss of _Hamilton_; and King _Charles_ I.
_Anno_ 4. to _Theophilus_, Earl of _Suffolk_, and the Year ensuing to
_William_, Earl of _Northampton_: And _Anno_ 14. Sir _James Palmer_, by
his Sovereign’s Direction, paid for the Velvet and Taffety of the Earl
of _Kelly_’s Mantle and Surcoat, to Sir _Peter Richaut_, and put it
upon the Account of the extraordinary Expence of the Order.

King _Charles_ II. as a signal Mark of his Favour, caused seventeen
Mantles (with the usual Liveries of Surcoat and Hood,) to be made ready
against the grand Feast of St. _George_, _Anno_ 13. which he confered
not only among the new elect Knights, but upon the Earls of
_Salisbury_, _Barkshire_, and _Northumberland_, that were three Senior
_Knights-Companions_.

The Collar of the Order, and the great George, the elect Knight is to
provide himself, unless where the Sovereign is pleased to bestow the
Mantle, which is always accompanied with the Collar, and then a like
Warrant issues to the Master of the _Jewel-House_, as was used for
providing the seventeen Collars, _Anno_ 13 _Car._ II.

The black Velvet Cap before-mentioned and described, with the Helm,
Crest, and Mantlings, together with a Sword and Girdle, are to be got
in readiness by the care and direction of the Garter, but at the
Expence of the Knights elect; all which are to be set over his Stall,
as soon as his Installation Fees are paid.

This Honour, that every _Knight-Companion_ shall have his Helm, Crest,
and Sword, affixed over his Stall at the Chappel of St. _George_, is
particularly provided for in all the several Bodies of Statutes; and
are ordained to remain there during the Lives of the Possessors, _In
Memory of him that bears them, and a Testimony of the Defence of the
Church, as the Oaths of Military Orders require_.

The Helms upon this Occasion are composed of Steel, and of a more than
ordinary proportion; those for Sovereign Princes are framed open, with
large Barrs; but those for the _Knights-Subjects_ are made close. About
King _Henry_ VIII’s Reign, the _Knights-Subjects_ Helms were parcel
gilt with fine Gold in Oil, wrought with curious Works, and burnished
with fine Gold. But in the Reign of Queen _Elizabeth_, and since that
Time, it hath been the Custom to gild their Helms all over, and place
the Arms of St. _George_ in the Middle before the Vizors.

The Mantlings that hang down on either side of the Helm, together with
the Wreath, are in some places called Appendixes, and are all of
Tissue, or Cloth of Gold, and formerly lined with Sarcenet; but in the
Reign of Queen _Mary_ they were exchanged for white Satin, for so were
the Mantlings of _Anthony Brown_, Viscount _Montague_, and _William
Howard_, Lord Admiral, lined.

At the bottom of these Mantlings hang a pair of gilt Knobs burnished
with Gold, from which spring out Tossels either of Gold or Silver,
(consentaneous to the Metal in the Knights Court of Armour) mixed with
Silk of the chief Colour in his Arms.

Upon the Helm and Mantlings, is placed a Wreath of corded Silk, of the
Knight’s Colours, which was formerly of Sarcenet, but now of Taffety.

The Crest of the Knight is placed either upon these Wreaths, or Issuant
out of a Crown, or Ducal Cap, turned with Ermin; and of what kind
soever the Crest is, the same is neatly carved in Wood, and either
gilt, or wrought in; Directly before the Helm, an armed Sword hangs
down, the Pomel, Cross, and Chape are gilt; the Scabbard is made of the
same Tissue or Cloth of Gold as the Mantlings are, as is the Girdle
that belongs to it; but the Buckles and Pendants are of Copper Gilt.

The Custom of setting up the Helm, Crest, and Sword, over the Stall of
the Knights, is as ancient as the Institution of the Order; but when
the Banners were first hung up, we have not so clear a Conviction; for
neither the Statutes of Institution, nor those of _Henry_ V. make
mention of them.

The first time they occur to us, we find to be in _Anno_ 2 _Hen._ VI.
in the black Book of the Order, where the Banners of the King of
_Portugal_ is particularly spoke of, among the Atchievements then set
over the Stall. But they are more particularly mentioned in the Body of
King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes.

The Fashion of the Sovereign’s and all the _Knights-Companions_ Banners
are square; yet it does no where appear what the exact Standard was;
yet we find them in the Reign of Queen _Elizabeth_ to be two Yards and
a Quarter Long, and a Yard and three Quarters Broad, besides the
Fringe, which is composed of Gold, or Silver and Silk, of the Colours
in the Wreath; and on them are wrought, upon Taffety-Sarcenet, double
Sarcenet, or rich Taffety, with fine Gold Colours on both sides, the
Paternal Coat of the _Knights-Companion_, together with his Quartering,
or so many of them as he pleases to use, and the Garter is to take care
they be warrantably Marshalled.

And because a single Coat was not conceived to stand fair enough in a
Banner of this proportion, the Sovereign hath been pleased to grant a
new Coat, to bear in Quarters his Paternal one, if he wanted it; as
King _James_ I. did to _Robert Carr_, Viscount _Rochester_; to whose
Paternal Coat he first added a Lion Passant, Gardant Or, in the dexter
Part, as an especial Gift of his Favour, and then invented a new Coat,
to be born in Quarter therewith, _viz._ Quarterly Or and Gules, a Lyon
Rampant Sable over all, _June_ 8. _Anno_ 9 _Jac._ I.

These Banners of Arms are fixed to the End of long Staves, painted in
Oil, formerly of the Colour of the Wreaths, but now Red; their Ends are
put into Sockets of Iron, well fixed in the Wall, directly over the
_Knights-Companions_ Helms and Crests, and frequently lined with
Fustian to preserve them.

There is moreover to be provided a Copper Plate Gilt, whereupon are
engraved, the Escutcheon of the Knights elect Arms in Colours
Enamilled, with his Quartering, Helm, Crest, and Supporters, and
underneath, his Style and Titles of Honour, encircled with a Garter.
Which Plate the Garter usually takes Care to provide, and is to be
fixed on the back of the Knights Stall, assigned for his Installation.

A Velvet Cushion is likewise to be provided, to carry the Knight’s
elect Mantle, Collar, Hood, and Book of Statutes, before him, in the
Progress into the Choire, in order to his Installation. At the
Installation of the Lord Treasurer _Weston_, and the Earls of _Exeter_
and _Lindsey_, who were installed, _Anno_ 6 _Car._ I. the materials and
garnishing of these Cushions are recited severally, to contain one Yard
and a Half of Crimson Velvet, one Ell of rich Taffety for their Lining,
four Yards of Fringe, and four great Tossels.

Lastly, There have frequently been made ready a convenient Number of
Lodging Escutcheons of the elect Knights Arms, invironed with a Garter,
and his Stile and Titles placed underneath; it having been an ancient
Custom, for the Knights to distribute these Escutcheons at the Inns, in
their Passage to, and at _Windsor_, as a Memorial of their Installation.

What falls under the Care of the Garter to prepare and make ready, the
Expence sometimes has been cast up, and the Account stated and defraid
before-hand; by which means, he was in a better capacity to furnish out
the Ceremony, for so did the Earls of _Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_,
_Anno_ 34 _Eliz._

Besides these mentioned to be prepared and provided either by the
Chancellor of the Order, or the Garter, the Knight elect must take care
of other Affairs more particularly relating to himself and his retinue;
such as are Apparel, the Number of his Attendants and Servants, with
their Cloaths and Liveries, his Coach and Saddle Horses, both for
himself and them, with other material Circumstances, to set off his
Cavalcade and Proceeding with greater Pomp and Gallantry. The
Provisions for Dyet at _Windsor_ (if the Feast be kept at the elect
Knight’s Charge and Expence,) are to be considered of, and very often
some Clark of the Sovereign’s Kitchin is to be consulted, in the
management of that Affair.

The Hall or Room where the grand Dinner is to be kept, as well as the
Chapter-House and Chappel, ought chiefly to be decked and adorned with
rich and sumptuous Furniture, against this Solemnity, over and above
what is commonly used. The Hall or Dining-Room is to be set off with
rich Hangings; and if the Sovereign or his Lieutenant hold the Feast,
there must be placed a Cloth of State at the upper End of it. The
Chapter-House is also to be hung, and a rich Carpet spread upon the
Table, set about with Velvet Chairs and Cushions; and because in the
late Times of Rebellion and Plunder, this Place was not exempt, and
nothing was found there upon the Restauration; King _Charles_ II. in a
Chapter convened the 1st of _January_, _Anno_ 14th of his Reign, caused
Directions to be given to the Master of the Wardrobe, to provide Velvet
for Chairs, to furnish the Chapter-House, and Cushions to be used in
the Choir of St. _George_’s _Chappel_, which accordingly were prepared
against the following Feast.

Against the Installation of _Philip_, King of _Castile_ and _Leon_,
_Anno_ 22 _Henry_ VII. The Table in the Chapter-House was covered with
Cloth of Gold, and the Forms with Baudkin; before the Sovereign was
laid a Cushion of Cloth of Gold, whereupon a Crucifix lay, and the
Evangelist turned open to a place of the Cannon, with several Tapers
burning on either Side. At the upper End of the Table, towards the
Right Hand, was set a Chair for the Sovereign, under a golden Canopy,
with Cushions of Cloth of Gold, and on the Left Hand a Stool with like
Embellishments, for the King of _Castile_.

In St. _George_’s _Chappel_, the High Altar is to be richly adorned
with Plate, the Sovereign’s Stall with a Canopy, and other usual
Ornaments, and the Stalls of the _Knights-Companions_ present at the
Ceremony, with Velvet Cushions. As to the Furnishing of other Places in
the Castle of _Windsor_, on so solemn an Occasion, we shall relate the
Account of the Ceremony of the Installation of the King of _Leon_ and
_Castile_, just now mentioned. The Words are these:


#To wit of the gret rich Cobbord, which continually stode in the gret
Hall, which was all guilt Plate, or of the gret and rich Beds of
Estate, Hangings of rich Cloth of Gold, or of the rich and sumptuous
Clothes of Arras, with divers Clothes of Estate, both in the King’s
Loggings, and in the King of# Castile’s #Loggings, so many Chambers,
Haulls, Chappels, Closettes, Galleries, with odir Loggings, so richly
and very well appointed, with divers odir things, that I suffice or
cannot discern, and as I suppose few or none that there were, that ever
saw# Castell #or odir Loggings, in all things so well and richly
appointed, and the great continual fare, open Houshold, so many Noble
Men soo well appareilled and with soo short Warnying, heretofore, as I
think hath not been seen.#




                               CAP. XII.

            _The Personal Installation of a Knight-Subject._


§ 1. Formerly the Knights elect proceeded from _London_ to their
Installation at _Windsor_, in the nature of a Solemn and stately
Cavalcade, which was performed on Horse-back, with the greatest
Grandeur, and exceeding Pomp, whether we refer to the great Number of
their Honourable Friends, who, on gallant Coursers, rode along with
them; or the multitude of their own Attendants well mounted, the
magnificence of whose Apparel, Jewels, Gold Chains, rich Embroideries,
and Plumes of Feathers, of their Lord’s Colours, struck Amazement, and
even dazled the Eyes of the Spectators.

Equivalent to this Pompous Show was the Feast, which contained in it
all manner of Stateliness and Plenty, as well of Provision, as other
Incidents that might increase its Glory, in which the elect Knights,
who kept it at their own Expence, strove not only to out-vie their
Predecessor, but to Excel one another; That all Embassadors and
Strangers esteemed it one of the goodliest and noblest Sights, that was
to be exhibited in Christendom.

But to make the splendor of the Cavalcade no less conspicuous to the
City of _London_, than to the Town and Castle of _Windsor_, the Knights
elect have taken up their Lodgings, sometimes in the _Strand_,
sometimes in _Salisbury-Court_, in _Holborn_, or within the City; and
for intent they chose to pass through some Eminent Streets, that the
People might the better Survey them, and receive the greater
Satisfaction. To illustrate which Matter, we shall descend to some
Particulars.

_Anno_ 34 _Eliz._ _Gilbert_, Earl of _Shrewsbury_, in order to his
Cavalcade, was lodged in Mr. _Gresham_’s House, (now known by the Name
of _Gresham-College_,) whence he Rode through the City, accompanied
with many of his Honourable Friends, and a numerous and gallant Train
of Attendants and Servants, to _Charing-Cross_, where he met _George_,
Earl of _Cumberland_, (his Companion elect) and thence both Rode
together towards _Windsor_; within a Mile or two of which Place, Garter
King of Arms met them, and Marshalled their Attendants in Order; and
then the elect Knights proceeded with their gallant Train through the
Town into the Castle in this Order.


        1. Trumpets, two and two.
        2. Gentlemen in Blue Coats and Gold Chains.
        3. Gentlemen of Note.
        4. Garter.
        5. Gentlemen Ushers.
        6. The two elect Knights, Earl of _Ormond_, and Baron of
           _Effingham_; with their Footmen about them.
        7. Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of Quality.
        8. All their Servants in the Rear.


Custom and Peace contributed to make the Cavalcades more glorious,
during the Reigns of Queen _Elizabeth_, and King _James_ I. and
especially that of _Robert_, Earl of _Salisbury_, and _Thomas_,
Viscount _Bindon_, _May_ 21st, _Anno_ 4 _Jac._ I. who arrived at
_Windsor_ honourably accompanied, with a great appearance of Nobility,
Knights, and Gentlemen of Figure.

But the Fate of this Solemnity, much like that glorious Body of the
Sun, (whose Lustre at such times it strove to outshine) had now and
then its interpositions, and intermitting Clouds, at other times long
Nights, and the Splendor and Glory thereof but struck the Sight now and
then; when the Pleasure of the Sovereign grew auspicious, or the Honour
of the Order became fixed upon more generous Spirits. But to speak
impartially, there may grow an Excess in such Solemnities, even to
Shame and Surfeit; and the best Cure to prescribe for it, is a long
Abstinence. Nor was this Festival at all Times free from this
Distemper, but then a quick Application of the Sovereign’s soon
rectified it by taking away the Cause, and prohibiting Excess in their
Attendants.

For this reason it was that King _James_ I. observing those Excesses
the elect Knights run into upon this Occasion, and willing to cheque
the growing Inconveniencies, at the Installation, of _Francis_, Earl of
_Rutland_, Sir _George Villars_, Kt. (afterwards Duke of _Buckingham_)
and the Viscount _Lisle_, _Anno_ 14 of his Reign, _forbid Livery Coats,
for saving Charge, and avoiding Emulation_; and shortly after, in a
Chapter at _White-Hall_, _Anno_ 16. with the Consent of the
_Knights-Companions_ then assembled, to put some restraint upon the
Number of Attendants, decreed, _That every of the Knights-Companions
should have fifty Persons to attend him unto the Annual Solemnities of
the Order, and no more_.

In the Installation of _William_, Earl of _Northampton_, _Anno_ 5
_Car._ I. we find this stinted Number encreased to fourscore, who began
his Cavalcade to _Windsor_, from _Salisbury_ House in the _Strand_, and
certainly wou’d have exhibited a more glorious Show, had not a
continual Rain for three Days space impeded him. Nevertheless, that
what he designed with so much Splendor and Gallantry might out-live the
accident of foul Weather, the Order of it shall be inserted here.


         _The Order of riding to the Installation of_ William,
             _Earl of_ Northampton, _20th of_ April, 1629.

1. Trumpets, whose Banners were of Damask, and had the Earls Arms, with
  his Crest and Supporters environed with a Garter.

2. The meanest of his Servants; as Grooms and Yeomen, in Blue Coats,
  two and two.

3. His Lordship’s other Servants, in Blue Coats; as Gentlemen,
  Esquires, and Knights, two and two.

4. Two Secretaries; Mr. _Ralph Goodwin_, and Mr. _Francis Merosse_.

5. Steward, Mr. _Cuthbert Ogle_.

6. Comptroller, Mr. _William Goodwyn_.

7. Two Pages.

8. His spare Horse, led by the Gentleman of his Horse.

9. His Chaplain to distribute his Alms.

10. Pursiuvants at Arms, two and two.

11. Gentleman Usher, Mr. _Walter Thomas_, Bareheaded.

12. The Senior Herald covered.

13. The Earls of _Berkshire_, _Northampton_, and _Salisbury_.

14. Noblemen in their Places, two and two.

15. Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, which accompanied him.

16. The Commissioners Servants.

17. Other Noblemens, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemens Servants.


_Henry_ Earl of _Danby_, and _William_ Earl of _Morton_, being to
receive the Honour of Installation, _Anno_ 10 _Car._ I. disposed
themselves for their more commodious Passage, and the Peoples View; one
was at _Warwick House_ in _Holbourn_, and the other at _Dorset House_
in _Salisbury-court_, and made their Progression severally through the
Streets to _Hyde-Park_, each having two Noblemen to support him, with
their Footmen in rich Coats on either side them.

Their Gentlemen Ushers rode Bareheaded, and before them the Officers of
Arms wearing their Coats, and their Servants in blue Coats and
Cognizances, (as was the ancient Mode,) were all led on by Trumpets.
The rest of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen followed after each
Knight’s elect Troop, according to their Rank and Quality foremost. The
Proceeding of the Earl of _Morton_, was Marshalled in this manner.


        1. Trumpets, two and two.
        2. Grooms in Coats, two and two.
        3. Yeomen, two and two.
        4. Gentlemen, two and two.
        5. Secretaries.
        6. Stewards.
        7. Gentleman of the Horse.
        8. Pages.
        9. Four Officers of Arms.
        10. Gentleman Usher bare.
        11. _Lancaster_ Herald covered.
        12. Earl _Morton_, supported between two chief Lords.
        13. Foot-men on each side, in rich Coats.
        14. Noblemen and Gentlemen, according to their Degrees.


At _Slough_, (two Miles on this side _Windsor_,) they all made a stand,
and being again placed in Order, they proceeded to _Windsor Castle_,
where, alighting in the lower Court, the Knights elect were conducted
to their several Apartments.

The last Cavalcade this Age has beheld, was exhibited by _Algernoon_,
Earl of _Northumberland_, _May_ 13. _Anno_ 11 _Car._ I. from _Dorset
House_ in _Salisbury-court_, toward _Windsor_; nor was it the least in
Pomp and Glory: Eight and forty Gentlemen preceeded, then came the
Pages, being Earls Sons, _viz._


       1. Mr. _William Herbert_, Mr. _John Herbert_, Mr. _Philip
          Cecil_, Mr. _Algernoon Sidney_.
       2. Heralds at Arms, two and two.
       3. Mr. _Blundeville_, Gentleman Usher, Bareheaded.
       4. _Norroy_ King of Arms.
       5. Marquiss of _Winchester_.
       6. The Earls of _Northumberland_ and _Kent_.


And somewhat behind him, the rest of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen
in order; they had Priority according to their Quality, Riding two and
two, and the Coaches closing up the Troop.

There was a publick Cavalcade designed from _Somerset House_ in the
_Strand_, to _Windsor Castle_, when King _Charles_ II. was to have
been installed, which though it proved Abortive, yet ought not to
be omitted, by reason of the Chancellor’s Letter to each
_Knight-Companion_, to make Preparation to attend him thither.


_May it please your Lordship_,

“The King’s Majesty, Sovereign of this most Noble Order of the Garter,
having determined to Create the Prince his Eldest Son Knight, and to
propose him in Election, to be a Companion of his Order; for the better
Conveniency of his Installation, hath prorogued, by a Commission under
the Seal of his Order, given the 25th of _February_, now remaining in
my Custody, the Celebration of the Feast of St. _George_, from the 22,
23, and 24 of _April_ next, whereon it shou’d have been Solemnized,
unto the 21, 22, and 23 of _May_, immediately ensuing; and thereby
given Command to all the _Knights-Companions_, and Officers of this
Order, that they should attend his Royal Person, at his Palace of
_White-Hall_, upon those Days appointed. In discharge of the Duty of my
Place, and by special Order, I do signify unto your Lordship his
Majesty’s Will, and that it is his Pleasure, for the more Honour of the
Prince, and the Noble Feast of his Election and Installation, that your
Lordship shou’d be attended with your Servants and Retinue, according
to solemn Custom, and be prepared to Accompany his Higness, from
_Somerset House_ in the _Strand_, unto the Castle of _Windsor_, upon
the 18th of that Month, and assist at the Ceremony and Feast of his
Installation, upon the Day following: Praying your Lordship that you
would be pleased to take knowlege hereby, both of the Time and Place
designed, and of the Sovereign’s Order, I humbly rest,”

                                                 _In all due Obedience,_

                                                 _and Observance,_

                                                 Thomas Rowe.

 St. _Martin’s-lane_,
   _Feb._ 27. 1637.


When this Letter was issued out, the Sovereign intended to create the
Prince Knight of the _Bath_, which Ceremonies were intended to begin at
the old _Palace-yard_ in _Westminster_, upon the 21st Day of _May_,
_Anno_ 13 _Car._ I. and to Solemnize the Feast of St. _George_, upon
the 23d of the same Month at _White-Hall_, and to take the Scrutiny
that Evening for his Election into this Order: The next Day was
designed to invest him with the Garter and George, and the Day after to
set forward the Cavalcade towards _Windsor_, wherein also the Knights
of the _Bath_, (intended to be created with the Prince,) were to Ride
with their Robes. But this Resolution being altered, stop’d the
Progression of the Cavalcade, and in the room of a Knight of the
_Bath_, he was created a _Knight-Batchellor_ at _Windsor_.

Formerly it was the manner for the Sovereign’s Lieutenant to Ride to
_Windsor_, attended with a gallant and glittering Train, and no small
Number of his own Gentlemen and Yeomen richly attired, and in every
Punctilio fifty set out, as was seen in the Cavalcade of the Duke of
_Norfolk_, Earl Marshal of _England_, and Lieutenant for the Sovereign,
for St. _George_’s Feast, _Anno_ 5 _Eliz._ who had attending him twenty
of his own Gentlemen and Yeomen, at the Time the Earls of
_Northumberland_ and _Warwick_ were to be installed; but this was never
put in Practice, but when the Sovereign appointed the Installation and
the Feast of St. _George_ to be celebrated together.

The Lieutenant, and his Assistants, or sometimes the
_Knights-Commissioners_, (if the Feast of St. _George_ be not then
Solemnized,) being arrived in the Castle, immediately retire to their
Lodgings, which for the most part have been prepared at the _Dean’s
House_, whose Rooms are the fairest in the Castle, and the best fitted
for Accommodation, next to those of the Sovereign’s in the upper Ward;
and for the Knights elect, they were at all Times furnished with
Lodgings in some of the Prebends Houses.


        _The Offering in the Chappel, on the Eve of the Feast._

§ 2. If it so chanced that the Installation was performed by
Commissioners, and the Cavalcade proceeded from _London_, in
the Morning of the Day preceeding the Installation, and arrived
at the Castle of _Windsor_ early that Afternoon; then the
_Knights-Commissioners_ have been accustomed only to put on their
Mantles, and enter St. _George_’s Chappel to offer; but without the
Attendance of Heralds, or any solemn Procession into the Choir, save
one of the Prebends; where having placed themselves in their Stalls
with usual Reverences, and heard an Anthem, they passed up to the
Altar with the Verger and Garter before them, and there made their
Offering, both of Gold and Silver, according to the usual Custom. As
soon as _Vespers_ were finished, after the same manner they descended
from their Stalls, and departed to their Lodgings; and in this case the
_Knights-Commissioners_ did not lay by their Mantles till Supper was
ended.

In this nature was the Ceremony of Offering (on the Eve of the
Installation) performed by the Lord Admiral and Earl of _Ormond_,
Commissioners for the Installation of the Earl of _Shrewsbury_ and
_Cumberland_, _Anno_ 34 _Eliz._ But at the Installation of the Earl of
_Rutland_, and others, _Anno_ 26 _Eliz._ the Lord _Hunsdon_ (one of the
Commissioners for that Solemnity,) refused to make his Offering alone,
though he arrived timely enough, on the Eve of the Feast at _Windsor_
Castle, because he wanted the Company of Viscount _Mountague_, who was
a joynt Commissioner with him, that arrived not till the Morning after.

This Offering of the _Knights-Commissioners_, coming to the Castle
on the Eve of the Installation, is founded upon an Article of
_Edward_ III. which runs to this Effect: _That if any of the_
Knights-Companions, _being upon a Journey, shou’d accidentally pass
by_ Windsor-Castle, _he is to turn in thither, in Honour of the
Place, and prepare himself to enter into the Chappel to Offer;
first putting on his Mantle, without which he must never presume to
enter into it_; but upon Emergencies, and allowable Causes, he is
to be excused.

After the _Knight-Companion_ had entered the Castle, the Canons
Resident were, by the aforesaid Article, appointed to meet and recieve
him, and with due Reverence conduct him into the Choir. If it was at
the Celebration of High Mass, the Knight was obliged to stay and hear
it, in Honour of God and St. _George_; but if he arrived in the
Afternoon, he was to stay till the Canons, and the rest of the Choir,
had sung the Anthem _de Profundis_, which no sooner was ended, but he
proceeded to the High Altar and Offered, and returned to his Stall with
usual Reverences, and then departed.

But if the _Knight-Companion_ passed through the Town of _Windsor_, and
neglected to Offer at the Chappel, as often as he omitted it, he was
bound, upon his Obedience, to walk a Mile on Foot to the Chappel, in
Honour of St. _George_, and upon defailure, to offer a Peny, which by
King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes is inlarged to a Groat. Upon the
Explication of this Article, there arose a Dispute about the just
Distance intended from the Castle; and that the Knights-Companions
might be sensible of the breach of the Injunction, it was thought
requisite by King _Henry_ VIII. to set down a certain Bound, which in
his Statutes is declared to be two Miles; within which, if any of the
_Knights-Companions_ come, and do not repair to the Chappel and Offer,
he is liable to the Mulct before specified.

Upon Hunting, or other Pastimes the Forest afforded, they used to send
their Offering in Money to the Canons, which being received, the
Knights took it for a Dispensation of the Ceremony enjoined by the
Statutes.

Endeavours were used to have this Article interpreted with greater
Latitude, which so far took Effect, that at a Chapter called at
_Windsor_ the 10th of _October_, _Anno_ 15 _Car._ I. it was ordered,
that some Expedient might be found out, to save the Knights from the
Breach of their Oath, if they came within the limited Distance of the
Place, and passed thence without Offering. But no farther Progress
being made in that Affair, the Law stands as it did.


                        _The Supper of the Eve._

§ 3. The Supper, after their arrival at _Windsor_, is but in the Nature
of a private Meal, and prepared for the Lieutenant (or Commissioners)
or Knights elect, most commonly at the Dean’s House. _Anno_ 26 _Eliz._
on the Eve of the Installation of the Earl of _Rutland_ and Lord
_Cobham_, the Commissioners supped together with such Lords and
Gentlemen of Figure as came along with them; and no Nobleman had above
one Servant to attend him at the Table, and the rest provided for
themselves at their proper Inns. Sometimes they have been permitted to
Sup in some Appartments of the Sovereign’s Lodgings; for so it was at
the Installation of the Lord _Russel_, and other elect Knights, _Anno_
31 _Henry_ VIII. and likewise of the Earl of _Shrewsbury_, and Lord
_Hunsdon_, _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ the Lieutenant and Knights supped in the
great Chamber there, in the same Regularity that was used at other
Times. And in the 34th of Queen _Elizabeth_, when the Earls of
_Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_ were installed, all the Lords and
Gentlemen supped together at one long Table set in the Council Chamber.


            _The Order in proceeding to the Chapter-House._

§ 4. Before we come to the particular Ceremonies of the Installation,
transacted either by the Sovereign, (or in his absence by his
Lieutenant or Commissioners,) we shall premise this general Remark:
That since neither the Statutes of _Institution_, nor those of King
_Henry_ V. afford us a Formulary for the Personal Installation of a
Knight elect; yet those enacted by King _Henry_ VIII. do briefly
exhibit the Order and Method of it. And we must farther observe, that
if the Installation be appointed together with the Feast of St.
_George_, then either the Sovereign, or else his Lieutenant and
Assistants are present; but if at any other Season, then it passeth by
Commissioners only.

After such time therefore as the Sovereign, his Lieutenant, or
Commissioners, have prefixed the Hour wherein to proceed to the Chapter
House, in Order to the Installation, (which has generally been
dispatched in the Evening,) all the _Knights-Companions_, and elect
Knights, the Officers of the Order, and of Arms, the Prebends of the
College, and Alms-Knights, are to give their Attendance, _viz._ the
Knights-Companions, and elect Knights, and Officers, of the Order, on
the Sovereign, in his inward Lodging; the elect Knights, and Officers
of Arms, in the Presence Chamber, the Prebends and Alms-Knights, in the
Great Chamber, where they waited the Sovereign’s coming forth.

The Attendance to be given upon the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, and such of
the Knights-Companions as are appointed for his Assistants, is by the
Officers of the Order and of Arms, the Prebends and Alms-Knights,
either at his Lodgings, or elsewhere he shall deem meet to appoint;
from which the Knights-Companions are exempt. For though the
Knights-Companions have sometimes proceeded to the Chappel before the
Sovereign’s Lieutenant, at an Installation, yet hath it been at such
time only, as they accompanied their Sovereign to _Windsor_, to hold
the Feast of St. _George_; and if the Sovereign, through any
Indisposition, or weighty Affair, cou’d not pass down to the Chappel on
the Eve of the Feast, yet they being obliged by the Statutes to
celebrate _Vespers_, did upon this Occasion proceed thither, though not
upon the Account of Installation; as it fell out at the Installation of
Prince _Henry_, and four other Knights, _Anno_ 1 _Jac._ I. when the
Progression began from the Presence Chamber, and thence passed to the
Chappel in the following Order.


     1. Alms-Knights.
     2. Prebends.
     3. Pursuivants.
     4. Heralds.
     5. _Ulster_ King of Arms.
     6. _Lyon_ King of Arms.
     7. _Clarenceux_ King of Arms.
     8. The four elect Knights.
     9. Knights-Companions.
     10. Garter.
     11. Register.
     12. Black Rod.
     13. Chancellor.
     14. The Sovereign’s Lieutenant leading the Prince in his Hand.


At the Installation of the Duke of _Brunswick_, and five other
elect Knights, the 23d of _November_, _Anno_ 1 _Car._ I. the
Knights-Companions likewise proceeded before the Sovereign’s
Lieutenants, tho’ the Sovereign was at _Windsor_, but not in the
Cavalcade.

Upon the Sovereign’s Commissioners, neither the Knights-Companions, nor
the Prelate, nor Chancellor, do give their Attendance; only at the
Grand Feast of St. _George_, _Anno_ 13 _Car._ II. the Chancellor then
waiting on the Sovereign at _Windsor_, in the Duties of his Place, out
of a singular Regard to his Royal Highness the Duke of _York_,
attending the Commissioners in the proceeding to his Installation, for
at that time he was Comptroller of his Houshould.

The Proceedings on this solemn Occasion have been generally order’d on
Foot; yet upon extraordinary Incidents have been marshalled and
disposed on Horse-back, in manner of a Cavalcade, as was used at the
Installation of _Philip_ King of _Castile_, _Anno_ 22 _Hen._ VII. and
that when the Lord _Russel_ and other elect Knights were installed,
_Anno_ 31 _Hen._ VIII. King _Philip_ (when the Earl of _Sussex_ was
installed, _Anno_ 1 and 2. _Ph._ and _Mar._) honoured him with his
Presence, and riding on Horse-back, with several of the
Knights-Companions, from his Lodgings in the Castle, down to the
Cloister Door, at the East-End of the Chappel, and there alighting,
proceeded directly to the Chapter-House. The Proceeding was on
Horse-back, at the Installation of the Earl of _Shrewsbury_ and the
Lord _Hunsdon_, _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ and at the Earl of _Northumberland_’s
and Earl of _Warwick_’s, _Anno_ 5. At the Installation of _Francis_,
Duke _Montmorency_, the Viscount _Hereford_, and the Lords _Burleigh_,
_Grey_, and _Shandos_, _Anno_ 14 _Eliz._ The Sovereign’s Lieutenant and
Knights Assistants did Robe themselves in the Sovereign’s Lodging in
the Castle; and meeting in the Presence Chamber, proceeded downwards
towards the outer Hall-door, in the upper Ward of the Castle, when
taking their Horses, adorned with Foot Clothes, they proceeded on
Horse-back to the West Door of the Chappel.

If the Progression was begun on Horse-back at the beginning of the
Feast, so it continued, as often as the Sovereign (his Lieutenant or
Commissioner) went to the Chapter-House, or Chappel, and their returns
were marshalled in the like Order at their setting out.

The Servants and Attendants belonging to the Knights elect, (if they be
taken into the Procession,) pass on first two and two in a Rank,
according to their Quality; and those who are the most inferior, the
foremost: Next the Alms-Knights in their Habits and usual Order.

Then follows the Virger of the College.

After him the Prebends or Canons: But what attendance they have given
heretofore at the Installations, the Memoirs of this illustrious
Society is wholly silent in; for in those Schemes left us of proceeding
to Installations, in the Reigns of King _Henry_ VIII. King _Edward_ VI.
Queen _Mary_, and part of Queen _Elizabeth_, we find them not inserted,
though since they are next to the Prebends of the College, the
Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings of Arms, proceed in a Body.

After them the Knights-Subjects elect, unless the Proctor of an
absent Knight-Subject, pass at the same time in this Proceeding, who
take Place after the Provincial Kings: And if it so chance, that the
Proctor to a Stranger-Prince be present at the same time, he is to
proceed between the Knight-Subject’s Proctor, and the Knights-Subject
elect. But Prince _Henry_ at his Installation, _Anno_ 1 _Jac._ I.
moved in a Place Superior to all the Knights-Companions, and was
paired with the Earl of _Nottingham_, the Sovereign’s Lieutenant for
that Occasion. Where two or more elect Knights prepare for their
Installation at the same time, they take Place according to the
Seniority of their Election, going two and two together; and if the
Number be odd, the Junior elect Knight passeth alone. Formerly the
elect Knight passed in his ordinary Apparel, wearing over it in Days
of Yore a short Gown, afterwards a Cloak, and of latter Times a Coat,
as did the Earl of _Northumberland_, _Anno_ 5 _Eliz._ and the Earls
of _Pembrook_ and _Derby_, _Anno_ 16 _Eliz._ and the Annals of the
Order make this remark upon the Earl of _Sussex_, and the Lord
_Buckhurst_, _Anno_ 31 of _Eliz._ of _Charles_ Duke of _York_, _An._
9 _Jac._ I. But this was before any peculiar under Habit, was
appointed to the Knights-Companions, for now there being a Cloth of
Silver Doublet, and Trunk Hose, established to be worn at the Feast
of Installation, and of St. _George_, the elect Knight proceeds in
this Dress, as did the Duke of _Albermarle_, _Anno_ 23 _Car._ II.

In this proceeding to the Chapter-House, he wears only the Garter about
his Leg, and the George and the Ribbond wherewith he was invested,
either about his Neck, or as of late drawn under his right Arm, which
being omitted by Sir _George Villars_, and Viscount _Lisle_, is noted
to be contrary to order.

The Earl of _Rutland_ with his Fellow elect Knights, _Anno_ 14 _Jac._
I. proceeded Bare-headed, as did the Duke of _Lenox_, _Anno_ 9 _Car._
I. as well as the Duke of _Albermarle_, _Anno_ 23 _Car._ II.

The elect Knight does not always make one in this Proceeding, but
sometimes stays at his Lodgings in the Castle, as did the Earls of
_Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_, _Anno_ 34 _Eliz._ or else at some other
convenient Station adjoining to the Chapter-House, till he be sent for
in thither, to receive Investiture with the Surcoat, as the Duke of
_Montmorency_ did, and other elect Knights, _Anno_ 14 _Eliz._ who went
privately from the Sovereign’s Lodgings, down to the House of Mr.
_French_, (then one of the Prebends,) and rested in the Parlour, until
they were sent for: Sometimes the Knight elect goes privately into the
East-Isle of the Chappel behind the High Altar, and there remains till
called in, as did the Duke of _Monmouth_, _Anno_ 15 _Car._ II.

If the Sovereign be present at the Installation, the Knights-Companions
proceed next after the Knights elect, according to the order of their
Stalls; but if the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, then his Assistants go in
their Places; as at the Installation of the Earl of _Shrewsbury_ and
Lord _Hunsdon_, _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ makes plain, the proceeding being
ordered after this manner.


                   1. Vergers.
                   2. Alms-Knights.
                   3. Officers of Arms.
                   4. Elect-Knights.
                   5. Assistants to the Lieutenants.
                   6· Officers of the Order.
                   7. Earl of _Arundel_, Lieutenant.


If the Installation be dispatched by Commissioners, then the three
inferior Officers of the Order immediately follow the Knight elect, and
proceed next before the Commissioners, and they were thus marshalled at
the Installation of the Earl of _Northampton_, _Anno_ 5 _Car._ I.


                   1. The Earls Servants.
                   2. Alms-Knights.
                   3. Prebends.
                   4. Heralds.
                   5. Elect-Knights.
                   6. Officers of the Order.
                   7. The Sovereign’s Commissioners.


Yet _Anno_ 16 _Eliz._ at the Installation of the Earls of _Pembrook_
and _Derby_, we find the Officers did precede the elect Knights, but it
was through inadvertency; at the Installation of the Earl of
_Northampton_, some Question and Debate arose, concerning the
precedency of these three Officers, in this proceeding, where it was at
length concluded, that from the Castle to the Chappel, they shou’d
proceed before the Commissioners; but in returning from the Chappel to
the Castle, they shou’d follow.

We presume the Question, (whatsoever it was) chanced not to be
propounded, till the proceeding was ready to pass on, and then started
on a sudden, because the Heralds (as the Annals note,) did not quickly
discypher the matter, that it proceeded more from surprize, than want
of Ability to resolve.

This determination which took Place, was barely grounded upon
Conjecture, and if seriously considered, will appear disconsonant to
Precedents and Practice, both before and since; where all returns are
marshalled answerable to their setting forth, unless the Condition of
any Person in the mean time suffer a Mutation.

It’s observable, that when Installation pass by Commissioners only,
these three inferior Officers wear their Robes, but bear not the
Ensigns of their Office in the Proceeding. And this seems to be deduced
from particular Injunctions, laid down in the Constitutions belonging
to the Officers of the Order, which appoint Garter and Black-Rod to
bear the Ensigns of their Offices at the Feast of St. _George_, when
the Sovereign or his Deputy shall be present; whence it may be
inferred, that if either chance to be absent, they are under no
obligation to bear them: For at the Installations of _Frederick_, King
of _Denmark_, and _John Casimire_, Count Palatine of the _Rhine_,
_Anno_ 25 _Eliz._ no Ensigns were born by the Officers; and so was it
practised the Year after, at the Installations of the Earl of _Rutland_
and Lord _Cobham_, as the Red-Book of Order plainly sets forth. But if
the Sovereign himself be present, or that he constitute a Lieutenant in
his stead, the Register then carries the Red-Book, and the Garter and
the Black-Rod bear each of them their Rods. It is remarkable, that in
every proceeding to Installation, by Lieutenant, or Commissioners, the
Garter carries the Sovereign’s Commission in his Hand before them to
the Chapter-House. At the Installation of the Earls of _Derby_ and
_Moreton_, the Officers of the Order proceeded before the Knights to
the Chapter-House, not only without the Ensigns of their Office, but
their Heads covered; and the reporter of this Installation gives this
for a reason; because there was then neither the Sovereign, nor his
Lieutenant, representing the King’s Person, present.

The Sovereign sometimes being willing to confer additional Honours to
some elect Knights, hath appointed their Installation at such time as
he personally solemnized the Feast of St. _George_, as he did at the
Installation and Election of _Philip_ King of _Castile_, _Anno_ 22
_Hen._ VII. which for its memorableness, and mixt proceeding on
Horse-back, we shall insert in this Place: He passed from the
Sovereign’s Lodging in the Castle, to the South-Door of St.
_George_’s-_Chappel_, and was thus ordered.


 1. Knights according to their Degrees.
 2. Lords after their Degrees.
 3. Knights-Companions in their whole Habit, bearing Company with some
    of the Knights of the Order of _Joyson d’Or_.
 4. Prelate of the Order.
 5. Archbishop of _Canterbury_.
 6. The _Spanish_ Ambassador.
 7. _Joyson d’Or_, King of Arms, in Coat of Arms.
 8. Garter King of Arms, in his Coat of Arms.
 9. The Sword.
 10. _Philip_ King of _Castile_.
 11. The Prince.
 12. King _Henry_ VII. Sovereign of the Order.


_Anno_ 19 _Jac._ I. was another instance at the Feast of St. _George_,
when the Sovereign, with several Knights-Companions, proceeded also to
the Chapel, at the personal Installation of _Frederick_, Prince
Palatine of the _Rhine_; we might add several other Examples, but shall
only mention that of the personal appearance of King _Charles_ II. at
the grand Feast of St. _George_, held next after his happy Restoration,
whereat twelve elect Knights were installed. At this Solemnity of
Installation, the Sovereign proceeds in full Robes, having the Sword of
State born before him by a Nobleman not of the Order, his
Train-bearers, _&c._ following the Sovereign’s Lieutenant and his
Assistants, as also the Commissioners proceed in full Robes, which is
mention’d, _Anno_ 31 _Henry_ VIII. when the Earl of _Arundel_ and his
Assistants installed the Lord _Russel_ and two other elect Knights, but
the Sovereign’s Lieutenant only hath his Train carried up, which is
usually perform’d by some of his own Gentlemen.

The Processional way (if beginning in the Presence-Chamber,) is from
thence in the upper Ward of the Castle, and through the other Wards in
at the Cloyster Door, and so to the Chapter-House; but if from the
Dean’s House, they go only through the Cloysters, into which there is
an immediate Passage from the Deanry: The proceeding having entred the
East Door of St. _George_’s Chapel, and past by the Chapter-House Door,
makes a stand in the North Isle; while first the Officers of the Order,
next the Knights-Commissioners, or else the Knights-Assistants, and the
Sovereign’s Lieutenant; or lastly the Knights-Companions, and the
Sovereign with the Sword born before him, pass into the Chapter-House,
but the Knight or Knights elect do not enter, but as they come in at
the Chapel-Door, they fall off on the left Hand into the East Isle
behind the high Altar, and there repose themselves, (on Chairs or
Stools, with Cushions purposely prepared,) until they are called into
the Chapter-House. This hath generally been the Custom, of which many
Examples might be produced, but in respect to great Personages they
have been sometimes (though rarely) admitted into the Chapter-House,
with the Sovereign or his Lieutenant, among whom _Philip_ of _Castile_
and _Leon_, _Anno_ 22 _Henry_ VII. and Prince _Henry_, _Anno_ 1 _Jac._
I. the latter was led in by the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, when four other
elect Knights installed with him sat till they receiv’d their Summons
to enter.

Sometime the Sovereign and Knights-Companions wav’d going to the
Chapter-House, and pass’d immediately into the Choir, as did King
_James_ _Anno_ 9. when _Charles_ Duke of _York_ and others were
installed; the like did King _Charles_ I. but then a Chapter was held
in the Privy-Chamber, before the proceeding set forward; and in the
former instance, when the proceeding came as far as the East End of the
Chapel, the Duke of _York_, _&c._ with _Norroy_ before them, went out
of the proceeding into the Chapter-House, and there reposed, while the
Sovereign proceeded on to the South Door of the Chapel, and thence into
the Choir.


            _The Ceremonies perform’d in the Chapter-House._

§ 5. After the Lieutenant’s entrance into the Chapter-House, and
opening the Chapter; Garter, with three Reverences, presents first the
Commissioners of Lieutenancy to hold the Feast, next that of
Installation, to the Lieutenant, (or if the Installation pass’d by
Commissioners, then only the Commission of Installation to the Senior
Commissioner,) which being receiv’d, he delivers it to the Register of
the Order, who forthwith Reads it; for to him this Duty belongs, as is
recorded in the Black-Book of the Order, on occasion of Garter’s
reading the Commission for Installation of Sir _Thomas Brandon_, _Anno_
22 _Henry_ VII. the Register being then absent.

When the Register hath read the Commissions, he returns them to the
Lieutenant, (or Commissioners,) and he again to the Garter, as at the
Installation of the Earls of _Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_, _Anno_ 34
_Eliz._ If the Sovereign be present, the Chancellor acquaints him the
Knights elect are without, otherwise the Lieutenant, and Assistants,
(or Commissioners) consult touching the calling in, and receiving them,
and Garter is usually employed in this Service; who, with all due
respect, compliments and conducts him to the Chapter-House Door: But in
the instance of the Earls of _Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_ aforesaid,
Garter went to their Lodgings, and having delivered his Message, they
forthwith repaired to the Chapter-House, their Train attending them to
the Door: At the Installation of _Francis_ Duke of _Montmorency_, the
Earl of _Leicester_, then the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, as an evidence of
singular respect, sent from the Chapter two of the four Assistants
assigned him, who taking Garter, and the Officers of Arms before them,
led him thence between them to the Chapter-House.

When there are two or more elect Knights, that wait in the East Isle,
expecting to be called in, Garter first conducts the Senior by Election
to the Chapter-House Door, and so the rest in their several Orders, as
in 14 _Jac._ I. by the Earl of _Rutland_, Sir _George Villars_, and the
Viscount _Lisle_; and so again 13 _Car._ II. As soon as Garter hath
conducted the elect Knight to the Chapter-House Door, two of the
Commissioners, (when the Installation is performed by Commissioners,)
or two of the Knights-Assistants, (when by the Sovereign’s Lieutenant,)
or two of the Senior Knights, (if the Sovereign himself be present,)
receive him without, who is immediately conducted from the
Chapter-House Door, up to the Sovereign, (his Lieutenant, or
Commissioners,) to whom he makes humble Reverence; when the Lieutenant,
(or Senior Commissioners,) in a short Speech, publishes the effect of
his Commission, and declares to him the Sovereign’s bounty and ready
kindness, in a full admittance into this Honourable Society, which the
elect Knight very humbly acknowledges and accepts. When _Philip_ King
of _Castile_ and _Leon_ was installed in Person, _Anno_ 22 _Henry_ VII.
the Sovereign being present rose from his Throne, and gave him
Information of the Statutes and Ceremonies of the Order, and how he was
bound by them; to all which he freely and readily assented.

These Ceremonies of receiving an elect Knight being over, he disrobes
himself of his upper Garment, then the Surcoat and Kirtle is taken from
the Table, with which he is invested; and during this Ceremony, the
following Words of Admonition, entred at the end of King _Hen._ VIII’s
Book of English Statutes, are read or spoken.


_Take this Robe of Purple, to the encrease of your Honour, and in
Token, or Sign, of the most Honourable Order you have receiv’d;
wherewith you being defended, may be bold not only strong to Fight, but
also to offer your self to shed your Blood for Christ’s Faith, the
Liberties of the Church, and the just and necessary defence of them
that are oppressed and needy._


After this, his Sword is close girt about him over his Surcoat, by the
Commissioners, (or the Assistants to the Lieutenant, or some of the
Knights-Companions,) and sometimes in the way of assistance, Garter
hath done this Service; and as soon as the Ceremony is over, the
Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, proceeds into the Choir, leaving the
elect Knights behind them: The Hood was heretofore put on in the
Chapter-House, (for so the Statutes of King _Henry_ VIII. do appoint,)
after the elect Knight hath been invested with his Surcoat, and before
he proceeded to his Installation; but of late, because it must be taken
off again in the Choir, and laid aside, that the Mantle may be put on,
it hath been esteemed a sort of diminution in the Investiture to take
off any part of the Habit before the whole Investiture be compleated;
so that in the beginning of the Reign of King _James_ I. it was judged
more convenient that the Hood should be carried on the Cushion by
Garter into the Choir, together with the Mantle and Collar, and not be
put on till after Investiture with the Mantle; and thus it was observed
at the Feasts of St. _George_, 13, 15, and 23 _Car._ II. And though
antiently it was laid over the left Shoulder, and so worn upon all
Occasions, yet _Anno_ 2 and 3 _Phil._ and _Mar._ the wearing it so
being taken notice of to obscure the Escutcheon of St. _George_,
embroidered on the same Shoulder of the Mantle, it was decreed in a
Chapter held the same Year, 22 of _April_, that for the future the
Knights-Companions should wear their Hoods on their right Shoulders, to
the end that the Escutcheon might be the better seen and appear.

Nevertheless, there was a Question moved 12 _Jac._ I. whether the
usage of wearing the Hood should not be restored to the left
Shoulder, but it seems it was over-ruled; and 23 _Car._ II. some of
the Knights-Companions imagining it most proper to wear their Hoods
on their left Shoulders, ran into that error, but upon better
information the next Morning, altered them to the right. To Foreign
Princes, there is liberty given by King _Hen._ VIII’s Statutes to
receive, if they please, their Habit wholly within the Chapter-House,
before they enter their Stalls; by which it appears that this was the
Custom in times past; an instance whereof we have in _Philip_ King of
_Castile_, _Anno_ 22 _Henry_ VII. who was entirely invested in the
Chapter-House with the Garter, Surcoat, Mantle, Hood, and Collar; the
Sovereign himself putting his Hand to his Investiture with the
Mantle. Hence King _Philip_, Grandson to the aforesaid King of
_Castile_, was invested with the whole Habit of the Order before he
assumed the Stall; in _Philip_ and _Mary_’s proceeding to the Chapel,
he receiv’d his Investiture within the West Door, and there the
Register delivered the Mantle to the Earls of _Derby_ and _Pembrook_,
who kissing it, presented it to the Queen, who, assisted by the said
Earls, personally invested the King therewith: Next Garter gave the
Collar to the Earls of _Arundel_ and _Pembrook_, who likewise
presented it to the Queen, and she thereon put it about King
_Philip_’s Neck; and immediately the Knights-Companions, having robed
themselves within the Chapel Door, proceeded before the King and
Queen, who with joined Hands passed into the Choir, where the Queen
led him to the Sovereign’s Stall, which ascending, they both sat
therein. But as the aforesaid Statute leaves this to the pleasure of
the Stranger Prince, and was permitted only for gaining Time, so
none, who have receiv’d personal Installation at _Windsor_ since,
have been fully invested before they entered the Choir. For instance,
_Francis_, Duke _de Montmorency_, 14 _Eliz._ and _Frederick_, Prince
Palatine of the _Rhine_, 10 _Jac._ I. were both invested with their
Surcoats only in the Chapter-House, but they receiv’d their Mantles,
Hoods, and Collars, in their Stalls, after they had taken their Oaths.


                    _The proceeding into the Choir._

§ 6. The Knight elect, habited as before, proceeds from the
Chapter-House along the North Isle, and enters the West Door of the
Choir in solemn Order; but his Place in this proceeding is changed, for
here he is led between two Knights-Companions. This is noted in the
Black-Book to be the Order wherein _Albra Vasques d’Almadea_, Earl of
_Averence_, and two others, proceeded to their Installations, 24
_Henry_ VI. And notwithstanding the Statutes of Institution, and those
made by King _Henry_ V. are silent in the Order of this Proceeding; yet
for an elect Knight to be led to his Stall between two fellow Knights,
is no modern Ceremony; since we likewise find, that the Viscount
_Bourchier_, 30 _Henry_ VI. past to his Instalment between the Lord
_Hastings_ and Lord _Beauchamp_. But the Order of proceeding is
precisely set down in _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes, _viz._ _That the elect
Knight, attended by his Gentlemen and Servants, shall be led between
two other Knights-Companions, the Officers of the Order going before
them_. And this has been the constant Practice at all Installations
since; the Knight elect proceeding, either between two of the
Knights-Commissioners, when there hath been no Lieutenant, or between
two of the Knights Assistants, where a Lieutenant was constituted; or
lastly between the two Senior Knights-Companions, the Sovereign being
present: But when there hath been three Commissioners named, then the
two Senior Commissioners take the Knight elect between them, and the
Junior Knight-Commissioner proceeds before them; which was observed at
the Instalment of the Earls of _Essex_ and _Ormond_, and Sir
_Christopher Hatton_, 30 _Eliz._

In all cases where the Sovereign is present at an Installation, after
the custom of investing with the Collar in the Chapter-House was left
off, it is generally to be observed, that as soon as the Investiture
with the Surcoat is finished, the Sovereign passes from the
Chapter-House into the Choir, with the whole proceeding before him,
leaving the elect Knight behind; and when he and the Knights-Companions
have taken their Stalls, the two Senior Knights-Companions, by the
Sovereign’s verbal Directions, descend from their Stalls, and stand
under their Banners, whilst the Alms-Knights, but not the Prebends,
Officers of Arms, and the three inferior Officers of the Order, pass
out of the Choir, and proceed before them to the Chapter-House, from
whence they introduce the elect Knight into the Choir to his
Installation; but if there be more than one Knight installed, then the
two next Senior Knights descend, and so the next, till all the elect
Knights are Conducted in: And this course is likewise observed when a
Lieutenant is constituted, and hath been generally so practised since
the Investiture with the Collar was performed in the Choir; and
particularly at the Installations of the Duke of _Lenox_, the Earls of
_Pembrook_, _Marr_, and _Southampton_, 1 _Jac._ I. and of the Duke of
_Holstein_, and the Earl of _Northampton_, 3 _Jac._ I. In this
proceeding to Installation, the Register usually carries a Book of the
New Testament, for the elect Knight to take his Oath on, as likewise
the Oath it self, fairly written on Parchment: Garter bears his Mantle
till he arrives at his Stall; and King _Henry_ VIII’s Statutes place
this Service upon some of the Knights-Companions likewise; but it never
appears that it was ever performed by any of them. ’Tis probable, that
about the time when this Injunction passed, it was the Custom for
Garter to bear the Mantle on his Arm; for so it was at the Installation
of the Lord _Russel_, and others, 31 _Henry_ VIII. but it was not long
after, that the laying it on a Velvet Cushion began. The great Collar
of the Order was likewise laid upon the Cushion, at the Installation of
Sir _Henry Sidney_, 6 _Eliz._ the Earl of _Shrewsbury_, 34 _Eliz._ and
in this manner born before the Knights elect, 13 _Car._ II. before the
Duke of _Monmouth_, 15 _Car._ II. and before the Duke of _Albermarle_,
23 _Car._ II. with these the Hood, heretofore put on in the
Chapter-House, hath of late been laid on the Cushion, and also the Book
of Statutes, and so born by Garter before Prince _Henry_, 1 _Jac._ I.
and _Frederick_, Elector Palatine, 10 _Jac._ I. and before the Knights
Installation, 13 _Car._ II. and since.

And here it is to be observed, that when Garter bears the Ornaments and
Ensigns on the Cushion before an elect Knight, or a Proctor, he is
always placed between the Register and Black-Rod in the proceeding:
Lastly, in this proceeding the Knight elect goeth Bare-headed, holding
his Cap in his Hand; and so did the Duke of _Albermarle_, 23 _Car._ II.
for it hath been thought incongruous to the Order of Investiture, as is
before observed of the Hood, to put on any part of the Habit, or other
Ornaments, that must be taken off again, before the Investiture is
compleated; and the proper Place for putting on the Cap is not till all
the other is finished.


                   _The Ceremonies of Installation._

§ 7. When the proceeding hath entered the Choir, the Alms-Knights, and
Officers of Arms, make their Obeysances toward the High Altar, and the
Sovereign’s Royal Stall, in the manner hereafter described; then they
proceed to the Steps before the Altar, and divide themselves; next the
Officers of the Order make the same Reverence; and lastly, the two
Commissioners, or Knights Assistants, or Knights-Companions, and
Knights-elect, all three together. After this the Officers of the Order
turn aside toward the Stall designed for the elect Knight, and
approaching near it, stand below in the Choir, whilst the
Commissioners, or Assistants, or Knights-Companions, pass into the
lower Row of Stalls, sometimes called the middle Row, directly under
the designed Stall, leading the elect Knight with them, who in this
Place takes his Oath, called in the Annals, the sacred Oath of the
Order of the Garter; during which time he ought to stand between the
two Knights-Companions who brought him thither, as at the Installation
of Prince _Henry_, 1 _Jac._ I. and when the Earl of _Shrewsbury_ was
installed, 34 _Eliz._ ’tis observed, that the Senior Commissioner first
entered the lower row of Stalls; but 31 _Henry_ VIII. at the
Installation of the Lord _Russel_, and others, the Junior Assistant
went up first. The Knight elect being thus placed, the Register of the
Order standing before them, but below in the Choir, reads the Oath; for
it is part of his Duty to administer the same: And in this solemn
Ceremony, the New Testament, whereon the Oath is taken, generally
opened in some Place of the Gospels, is indifferently held by one of
the three inferior Officers of the Order, or sometimes the Register
hath held it, as at the Installation of the Earl of _Derby_, 16 _Eliz._
the Earl of _Rutland_, and Lord _Cobham_, 26 _Eliz._ At other times the
Garter hath held it, as 5 _Eliz._ when the Earl of _Northumberland_
took his Oath; and 10 _Car._ I. at the Installation of the Earl of
_Moreton_: But when the Earl of _Shrewsbury_ was Sworn, 34 _Eliz._ the
Usher of the Black Rod performed this Office.

Whilst the Oath is administring, the elect Knight holds his right Hand
on the Holy Evangelists; and when the Register hath pronounced the
Words, he immediately Responses, _I will, so help me God_, and then
takes off his Hand reverently, kissing the Book; and by this Ceremony
seals his Obligation to the Statutes of this most Noble Order. The
Ceremony used when _Philip_, King of _Castile_ and _Leon_, took the
Oath, which was done in the Chapter-House at _Windsor_, 22 _Henry_ VII.
he laid his Hand on the Canon, under which was placed the Book of
Statutes of the Order by the Prelate, to whom it was delivered by the
Register, and having repeated the Words of the Oath, and reverently
kissed all those things by which he Swore, he took a Pen from the
Prelate’s Hand, and Signed the Oath he had taken, and deliver’d it to
the Sovereign then present.

The Form of the ancient Oath appointed by the Statutes of Institution,
to be taken by a Knight-Subject, was very short, but comprehensive:
_That he should well and faithfully observe, to the utmost of his
Power, all the Statutes of the Order_; and this was all the Oath taken
by the first Founders, and to which they also affixed their Seals; and
so it continued without alteration or addition, till towards the End of
King _Edward_ IV’s Reign; and then, at a Chapter held at the King’s
Wardrobe in _London_, it was decreed, That all the Knights-Companions
then alive, and all such as should afterwards be admitted into the
Order, should be obliged to subjoin the Words following: _That they
wou’d aid, support, and defend, with all their Power_, the Royal
College of St. _George_, within the Castle of _Windsor_, _as well in
its Possessions, as all other things whatsoever_; which being drawn in
form, was enter’d in the Black Book; but has since receiv’d many
alterations: And there is an instance, 1 _Eliz._ when the Oath has been
dispensed with; as by the Duke of _Norfolk_, and others, in regard the
Rites and Ceremonies of Religion were then altered, and no new form of
an Oath settled, so that they only obliged themselves by Promise to
observe such Statutes and Orders as should be decreed in the next
Council of the Order, which was soon after settled, and recorded in the
Red Book of the Order, and is the Oath taken by a Knight-Subject at
this Day.


_You being Chosen to be one of the Honourable Company of this most
Noble Order of the Garter, shall Promise and Swear, by the Holy
Evangelists, by you here touched, that, wittingly or willingly, you
shall not break any Statute of the said Order, or any Articles in them
contained; the same being agreeable, and not repugnant to the Laws of
Almighty God, and the Laws of this Realm, as far forth as to you
belongeth and appertaineth: So help you God, and this Holy Word._


As soon as the Knight elect hath taken the Oath, he is led to his
appointed Stall, through the Entrance next beneath it, and there placed
before it. In the Interim, Garter advancing into the lower row of
Stalls, to the Place where the elect Knight stood when he took the
Oath, presents from thence the Mantle, Collar, and Book of Statutes, to
those who led him, who invest the Knight elect first with the Mantle,
by putting it on his Shoulders. There are some Examples where the elect
Knight hath been invested before he went up to his Stall, as in the
case of the Earl of _Northumberland_, 5 _Eliz._ _Francis_, Duke _de
Montmorency_, and others, 14 _Eliz._ the Earls of _Dunbar_ and
_Montgomery_, 6 _Jac._ I. and the Prince of _Wales_, 14 _Car._ I. among
which may be numbered those installed at the Grand Feast of St.
_George_, 13 _Car._ II. but this happen’d through a vast Concourse of
People in the Chapel, that prevented the due Order.

In the Red Book it is observed, that the Investiture with the Mantle
and Collar, hath been sometimes performed by the Black Rod; as at the
Installation of the Earl of _Northampton_, 5 _Car._ I. the Lord
Treasurer _Weston_, the Earls of _Exeter_ and _Lindsey_, and the
Marquiss of _Hamilton_, 6 _Car._ I. Nevertheless, this is to be
understood as this Officers Assistance to the Knights-Companions, whose
Office it only is, and no otherwise. Whilst the Ceremony of Investiture
with the Mantle is performing, the Words of Admonition proper thereto,
are pronounced as follows.


_Take this Mantle of Heavenly Colours, in Sign and Token of the most
Honourable Order you have receiv’d, and to the increase of your Honour,
signed and marked as you see, with a red Escutcheon of our Lord’s
Cross, to the intent that you, being always defended by the Virtue and
Strength thereof, may pass through your Enemies, and them also overcome
and vanquish, so that at the last, for your worthy and approved Acts,
you may, after this Temporal Chivalry, come to Eternal Triumphant Joys
in Heaven._


But at the Installation of King _Charles_ II. they receiv’d some
alteration, and were put in the following Form.


_Receive this Robe of Heavenly Colour, the Livery of this most
excellent Order, in augmentation of thy Honour, enobled with the Shield
and Red Cross of our Lord, by whose Power thou may’st safely pierce
Troops of thy Enemies, and be over them ever Victorious; and being in
this temporal Warfare Glorious in egregious and heroick Actions, thou
may’st obtain Eternal and Triumphant Joy._


Next, the Commissioners, Assistants, or Knights-Companions, lay the
Hood on the Knight’s right Shoulder over the Mantle, and bringing the
Tippet athwart his Breast, tuck it under the Girdle, at which his Sword
hangs: And lastly tye the Collar about his Shoulder, over his Mantle
and Hood; and at this part of the Investiture, the following Words of
Admonition are likewise pronounced.


_To the encrease of your Honour, and in Token of the Honourable Order
you have receiv’d; take this Collar about your Neck, with the Image of
the Holy Martyr, and Christ’s Knight, St._ George, _by whose aid you
being defended, may pass through the Prosperities and Adversities of
this World, that having here the Victory, as well of your Ghostly as
Bodily Enemies, you may not only receive the Glory and Renown of
Temporal Chivalry, but also at the last, the endless and everlasting
reward of Victory._


This Form of Words receiv’d likewise alteration when King _Charles_ II.
was to be installed, to the Tenor following.


_Wear this Collar about thy Neck, adorn’d with the Image of the Blessed
Martyr and Soldier of Christ, St._ George, _by whose Imitation
provoked, thou may’st so overpass both prosperous and adverse
Encounters, that having stoutly vanquished thy Enemies, both of Body
and Soul, thou may’st not only receive the Praise of this transient
Combat, but be Crowned with the Palm of eternal Victory._


Antiently at the Solemnity of Installation, when the Sovereign, or his
Lieutenant was present, the elect Knight, after he had been invested
with the Mantle in his Stall, was immediately conducted out of the
Choir, back to the Chapter-House, where the Sovereign, or Lieutenant,
used to remain till his return, there to receive the Collar of the
Order from one of them, which done, he is said to have receiv’d the
entire Possession of his Habit. This is contained in King _Henry_
VIII’s Statutes, and appears to have been the Practice about that Time,
as in the case of the Lord _Mountjoy_, and others, 18 _Hen._ VIII. and
several others after, in the 1 and 3 _Edw._ VI. and the 3, 5, and 14
_Eliz._ The Proceeding back to the Chapter-House on this occasion, was
much after the manner of what is before mention’d, except, that here
the new installed Knight took his Place according to the Dignity of his
Stall. But ’tis observable, that when the Sovereign’s Lieutenant
remained in the Chapter-House, while the elect Knight proceeded to his
Installation, the Usher of the Black-Rod stayed behind to attend the
Lieutenant; and as soon as the Investiture with the Collar was over,
the Lieutenant proceeded to the Choir in the Rear, and the new
installed Knight in Place according to his Stall, as in the case of the
Lord _Russel_, and others, 31 _Hen._ VIII. and the Marquiss of
_Dorset_, and others, 1 _Edw._ VI. The Proceeding having entered the
Choir, and the Lieutenant and Knights-Companions taken their Seats,
then the usual Ceremonies, the Service of the Church began.

But when the Installation was performed by Commissioners, the Collar of
the Order was laid on the Cushion with the Mantle, and born before the
elect Knight to his Stall, where, after his Investiture with the Mantle
and Hood, he receiv’d Investiture with the Collar also, of which there
are several Examples in the time of _Phil._ and _Mar._ and Queen
_Eliz._ In like manner, at all Installations since, where the Sovereign
has been present, the ancient custom of returning to the Chapter-House
being laid aside, the Knights-Companions, who led the elect Knights to
their Stalls, did there invest them with their Collars also; as the
Earl of _Rutland_, Sir _George Villars_, and the Viscount _Lisle_, 14
_Jac._ I. and the Earl of _Suffolk_, 4 _Car._ I. and hath been thus
observed at all Installations since, the Sovereign present.

So soon as the Investiture with the Mantle, Hood, and Collar is over,
those appointed deliver the Book of Statutes to the new invested
Knight, which was observed to the Earls of _Shrewsbury_ and
_Cumberland_, 34 _Eliz._ the Earl of _Rutland_, Sir _George Villars_,
and the Viscount _Lisle_, 14 _Jac._ I. and so generally to all elect
Knights since. This Book the Knight is to keep safe in his own Custody,
for his Instruction in the Laws and Ceremonies of this most Noble
Order. They likewise give him the Black Velvet Cap adorned with Plumes
of white Feathers, and this in particular was observed to be the last
Ceremony performed at the Installation of King _Charles_ II.

All things relating to the full Investiture being ended, there remains
only to compleat this great Ceremony, the Installation it self, which
is performed in the manner following. The new invested Knight standing
before his Stall, and turning toward the High Altar, makes humble
Obeysance that way, and then toward the Sovereign, or if absent, toward
his Stall; which done, the Commissioners, Knights-Assistants, or
Knights-Companions, receive and embrace him with great Civility, as
their Fellow and Companion, and set him down in his assigned Stall with
Professions of Esteem, and Wishes for his Honour and Happiness. Of this
Ceremony, there is a notable Instance at the Installation of _Philip_,
King of _Castile_, 22 _Henry_ VII. where the Sovereign personally
introduced him to his Stall, and there placed him, at which time there
was a certain Form of Words pronounced relating to the elect Knight’s
Session, and Act of Installation, no less than at his Investiture, but
the same are not repeated.


          _The Order to be observed when two or more Knights
                       are installed in one Day._

§ 8. In this case it seems to have been the ancient Practice, when the
Ceremony has been perform’d by two Commissioners, or two
Knights-Assistants, that as soon as they had finished all the
Ceremonies due to the Senior of them, they left him possest of his
Stall, and forthwith returned to the Chapter-House in the usual manner,
and thence conducted the next Senior elect Knight, and so of the rest;
So it was at the Installation of _Albro Vasques d’Almadea_, Earl of
_Averenches_, the Lord _Beauchamp_, and Sir _Thomas Hoo_, in the time
of _Henry_ VI. and so of the Earl of _Huntington_, 1 _Edw._ VI. when
the two Assistants, after they had invested and installed the said
Earl, returned to the Chapter-House for the Lord _la War_, and so for
the Lord _Cobham_, and Sir _William Herbert_. In like manner, when the
Commissioners had given the Proctor to _Emanuel_, Duke of _Savoy_,
Possession of his Principal’s Stall, 1 and 2 _Phil._ and _Mar._ they
proceeded back for _William_ Lord _Howard_; so by the Earl of
_Pembrook_, 16 _Eliz._ when they had first installed the Earl of
_Derby_, and by the Earl of _Cumberland_, after the Earl of
_Shrewsbury_ had been installed.

When the Sovereign hath nominated three Commissioners, they have
returned altogether to fetch in the other Knights singly, that were to
be installed, and alternately changed their Places in the proceeding to
the several Installations, one of them always going single before; as
at the Installation of the Earls of _Essex_ and _Ormond_, and Sir
_Christopher Hatton_, 30 _Eliz._ when the Earl of _Worcester_, the
Lords _Hunsdon_ and _Grey_, were Commissioners: And if the Lieutenant
had four Assistants assigned him, which was necessary when many Knights
were to be installed, the order of their Installation hath been as
follows.

First, Two of the Senior Knights-Assistants conducted the Senior elect
Knight to his Installation, and the other two Assistants proceeded with
the second elect Knight; the former then took the third elect Knight,
and so alternately changed till all were installed: As at the
Installation of _Francis_, Duke _de Montmorency_, and others, 14
_Eliz._ And the like manner of alternate change is observed if four
Commissioners be constituted, as at the Installation of _Frederick_,
King of _Denmark_, and _John_, Prince Palatine of the _Rhine_, 25
_Eliz._ where the King’s Proxy was conducted into the Choir between the
Earl of _Leicester_ and the Lord _Hunsdon_, the two Senior
Commissioners; and the Prince, between the Earl of _Huntington_ and the
Lord _Charles Howard_, the two Junior Commissioners.

But some have been of Opinion, that the Commissioners named to this
Employment, ought not to divide the Duty, and part of them to Instal
one, and part the other, and by such an alternative to dispatch the
Ceremony, as in former Cases; but all jointly assist at each
Installation: Of which Opinion there is an Instance at the Installation
of the Earl of _Salisbury_, and the Viscount _Bindon_, 4 _Jac._ I.
where the Earl having been brought into the Choir, invested and
installed by the Earls of _Nottingham_ and _Suffolk_, the two Senior
Commissioners, the other two Commissioners who were left behind in the
Chapter-House, to conduct the Viscount to his Stall, remembring that
all four were joint Commissioners, apprehended that the Earl was not
legally installed, because they, as Co-partners in the Commission, had
not assisted; and this Opinion being debated, prevailed so far, that it
was agreed to be imparted to the Earl of _Salisbury_, who submitted to
descend into the lower Seats before his Stall, and there all four
Commissioners gave him his Oath again, then led him to his Stall, and a
second Time invested and installed him; and so of the Viscount _Bindon_.

But this Method was not only new, but different from former Practice,
as in all the cases before recited; and besides, where the Sovereign
hath authorized his Lieutenant to perform this Ceremony, and appointed
some of the Knights-Companions to assist, they, and not the Lieutenant,
have done the Duty belonging to Installation, that part of it of
investing with the Collar in the Chapter-House, the whole Duty at the
Installation of Prince _Henry_ excepted. And ’tis to be farther
observed, that the foregoing case of the joint Assistance in the
Installation of the Earl of _Salisbury_, was thought so little
Essential, or worthy of becoming a Precedent, that at the very next
Feast, when the Earls of _Dunbar_ and _Montgomery_ were installed, 6
_Jac._ I. and four Commissioners appointed, the two Senior installed
the Earl of _Dunbar_, and the two Junior the Earl of _Montgomery_; and
so again, 10 _Car._ I. by the Earls of _Danby_ and _Moreton_. But
lastly, if the Sovereign be present, and consequently the
Knights-Companions perform this Ceremony, then there is generally so
many of them as can go through the whole, without changing, after the
manner used when done by Commissioners or Assistants; in which case the
two Senior Knights-Companions descend from their Stalls, and passing
thro’ the Choir to the Chapter-House with the Proceeding before them,
conduct to his Installation the eldest elect Knight; and having
performed that whole Ceremony, return and take their Stalls, and so the
rest in due Order; as was practised at the Installation of Prince
_Henry_, and others, 1 _Jac._ I. and of the Earl of _Rutland_, 14
_Jac._ I. and at the grand Feast of St. _George_, 13 _Car._ II. but
here the separate proceeding with each single Knight to and from the
Chapter House, taking too much time, and the Day being far spent in the
Ceremonies of the Dukes of _Ormond_ and _Buckingham_; the Sovereign
ordered, that with the next Proceeding, the rest of the elect Knights,
being eight, besides two Proxies, should all be introduced at once; so
that each of them being placed before his Stall, took the Oath,
receiv’d his Investiture, and was led up to his Stall, and took
Possession of it by solemn Installation.

And in regard so many Knights elect were introduced together, it was
judged necessary, that their Mantles and Collars should be likewise
brought in the proceeding, and each elect Knight appointed one of the
Gentlemen that attended him, to bear the Cushion whereon they were
laid, before him to the Choir Door, where they held them in their Arms,
till Garter in due order fetch’d them into the Choir: And here we may
insert this general Rule, that at all Installations, where some of the
elect Knights are not sent for unto the Chapter-House, to receive
Investiture with the Surcoat, before the Senior elect Knight hath been
conducted to his Stall, but left to repose themselves in the East Isle
of the Chappel, as hath often happened, the Knights Commissioners, or
Assistants, on their return to the Chapter-House, send Garter for the
next Senior elect Knight, whom they receive at the Door thereof, and
having invested him with his Surcoat, and girt his Sword about him,
proceed with him to his Installation in the usual manner. And the same
method is observed if there were more elect Knights to follow; and we
find it 30 _Henry_ VIII. 16, and 34, and 10 _Car._ I.

The Knight, or Knights, having now receiv’d a compleat Installation,
the Knights-Commissioners, Assistants, or Knights-Companions, with
marks of Respect, take their leave of the last installed Knight, and
descending into the Choir, take their own Stalls; but the Senior
Knight-Companion ascends first: But observe, that if the Stalls of the
Knights-Commissioners, Assistants, or Knights-Companions, be on the
same side with the last installed Knight, then they descend not into
the Choir, but pass directly to them along the Stalls, as in the 34
_Eliz._ The Ceremonies of Installation being finished, the Officers of
Arms first, next the Alms-Knights, descend from the Steps of the Altar,
and take their several Stations in the Choir; then one of the Prebends
of the College, or, if the Sovereign be present, the Prelate, with the
Serjeant of the Vestry before him, is conducted to the Altar by the
Verger of the Chappel, and there begins the Service appointed by the
Church, which being ended, the Proceeding passes out of the Choir in
usual Order, either to the Presence-Chamber, or the Lieutenants, or
Commissioners Lodgings, as the Occasion is.


                   _The Offering of Gold and Silver._

§ 9. But if the Installation be solemnized in the Morning, the Service
of the Church having proceeded as far as the Offertory, two of the
Prebends, appointed to recieve the Offering, are conducted to the Altar
by their Verger, and first the Alms-Knights, then the Officers of Arms,
ascend the Steps of the Altar again, and stand in order as before.
After which, Garter Summons down the Knights-Companions to the
Offering, who descend into the Choir under their proper Stalls, as does
the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, who offers first for the Sovereign, he
receiving the Bezant from the Senior Knight, and then returns to his
Stall: And at this instant, was the usual time heretofore for offering
the Defunct Knights Atchievements, which was altered by King _James_ I.
as will be seen hereafter.

The Lieutenant, after a short stay in his Stall, descends again, and
proceeds up to the Altar, to make his own Offering of Gold and Silver,
and then returns, as do the rest of the Knights-Companions, including
those newly installed, in their due order. But when the Installation
passes by Commissioners, there is then no Offering made for the
Sovereign, but the Commissioners offer first, and after them the other
Knights in due order.

The Ceremony of Offering at the Installation of _Philip_, King of
_Castile_, 22 _Henry_ VII. is remarkable. He descended from his Stall
into the Choir, and standing before it, as the other Knights-Companions
did, the Sovereign left his Royal Stall to proceed to the Offering, to
which the King would have followed, but the Sovereign would not permit,
obliging the King to proceed along with him, on his left Hand, though
he desired to perform his Duty as a Brother of the Order, so that they
made their Offerings so near together, where, though the Sovereign had
the Precedence, yet ’twas hardly observable.


               _Of the grand Dinner at the Installation._

§ 10. On the Day of Installation, there hath, from ancient Time, been
appointed a Noble and Sumptuous Feast, and though it was agreed on in a
Chapter, 3 _Edward_ VI. _That the Knights elect might, from
thenceforth, be installed by Commission without a Feast_; yet after his
Reign, we find the old custom of a Feast at this Solemnity restored.

If the Sovereign appoint the Installation to be when the Feast of St.
_George_ is also celebrated, and is himself personally present, the
Feast is then kept at the Sovereign’s Charge; and if in such case he
constitute a Lieutenant, then the Installation Dinner is kept at the
Charge of the Lieutenant; and is usually prepared in some of the
Sovereign’s Lodgings in the Castle, but seldom in St. _George_’s Hall;
as was done by the Earl of _Arundel_, at the Installation of the Earl
of _Shrewsbury_, and the Lord _Hunsdon_, 3 _Eliz._ But when the
Installation is kept at any other time of the Year, than that of St.
_George_’s Feast, then the new installed Knights are at all the
Expence; who generally have had the Dinner prepared in the Dean’s
Lodgings; however, be it where it will, the Sovereign, or his
Lieutenant, Commissioners, or Assistants, together with the new
installed Knights, proceed thither in full Robes; which is observed in
the Installation of 3 _Eliz._ above, to be according to the ancient
Custom. At the Installation, 31 _Henry_ VIII. the Sovereign’s
Lieutenant walked alone, after him his two Assistants, and lastly the
new installed Knights.

The Lieutenant’s Place at the Table is somewhat on the left Hand the
Cloath of State, there sat the Earl of _Arundel_, 3 _Eliz._ but the
other four Knights-Companions, his two Assistants, and the two new
installed Knights, sat toward the Table’s End on both Sides, for that
they could not well sit all on a side. But of late Years, as at the
Installation, 5 _Car._ I. a Question arose, whether the Lieutenant or
Commissioners should sit at Dinner in their Habits, since the Power
given them seemed to expire when the Knights were elected; (though
unanimously allowed the new installed Knights ought to do so,) and
likewise Precedents quoted, as 29 _Henry_ VIII. at the Installation of
the Lord _Cromwell_, where the Knights put off their Habits, and dined
in their ordinary Apparel; and so of the Earl of _Rutland_, and the
Lord _Cobham_, 26 _Eliz._ where the Commissioners did the same, and the
new installed Knights kept on only their Surcoats: But what followed on
this Debate is not mention’d; but the general Practice at other Times
hath been of keeping on the Habit till the Dinner is ended.

At the second Course, called also second Mess, or second Service,
Garter, accompanied with the Officers of Arms, Proclaims the Stiles and
Titles of Honour of the Sovereign (if he be personally, or by his
Lieutenant, present,) in _Latin_, _French_, and _English_, and cries
Largess thrice; next the Stiles of the new installed Knights in
_French_, or _English_ only, with two Largesses, and in that Order they
were installed. And thus it was at the Installation of _Charles_, Duke
of _York_, 9 _Jac._ I. of _Frederick_, Prince Palatine, 10 _Jac._ I.
and the Earl of _Rutland_, and others, 14 _Jac._ I.

_Philip_, King of _Castile_, Dined with the Sovereign in his
Privy-Chamber, 22 _Henry_ VII. whose Stile was Proclaimed by Garter,
not in the same Room, but at the Sovereign’s great Chamber-Door, and in
St. _George_’s _Hall_, after Largess had been thrice cryed. When the
Sovereign constitutes a Lieutenant, then is the Lieutenant’s Stile also
Proclaimed, and to his other Honours is added this of his Lieutenancy,
and afterwards the Stiles of the new installed Knights, as 3 _Eliz._
But the Order of this Ceremony is more particularly observed at the
Installation of the Duke _de Montmorency_, and others, 14 _Eliz._ where
first Garter cried Largess, and next Proclaimed the Sovereign’s Stile,
_&c._ in three Languages, then stepping two Foot back, Proclaims the
Lieutenant’s Stile in _French_ only, with two Largesses; and after
that, he cried one Largess for the Duke; and lastly, for all the other
new installed Knights, only two Largesses, and the Officers of Arms did
the like; and still as Garter had finished his Proclamation, the
Heralds joined with him in crying Largess, and so with Reverence
departed the Hall.

But lastly, it is proper to observe, that when neither the Sovereign,
nor his Lieutenant, are present, then the Sovereign’s Stile is not
Proclaimed, nor those of the Commissioners, but only of the new
installed Knights.

As soon as Dinner is ended, the Knights-Companions rise from Table, and
withdraw to disrobe themselves, and therewith the Solemnity of
Installation ends: And if at any time the Solemnity continues that
Evening, and the following Day, it is only because the Sovereign (or
his Lieutenant,) is present, on account of celebrating St. _George_’s
Feast, and not with reference to the Installation.


              _Of setting up the Knight’s Atchievements._

§ 11. The last thing to be done at this great Solemnity, is setting up
the _Helm_, _Crest_, _Sword_, _Banner_, and _Plate_, of the new
installed Knight, over his Stall in the Chappel of St. _George_; to
which purpose they are to be provided, according to the Directions
before given.

By the Statutes of Institution it is ordained, that the time for
setting up the Atchievements shall be when the elect Knight comes to
_Windsor-Castle_, that is, to his Installation, and not before; and the
reason is there likewise given, lest it should happen, he not coming
for his Installation within the time limitted, and consequently the
vacating his Election ensuing, that a new Election being made, those
military Ensigns might not seem to be disgracefully withdrawn, and an
occasion of Dishonour given, which otherwise could not be avoided, if
they should be suddenly taken down from a Place so high; which
demonstrates, that the intention of this Article extends to the
finishing the Ceremonies of Installation, before the Atchievements
ought to be set up, by so carefully providing against the Dishonour of
taking them down, in case the Election should become void; which must
infallibly happen, if the Knight elect died but an Hour before he were
compleatly installed. Accordingly, in the ancient Deputations both to
Sir _William Philip_, and Sir _John Falstaff_, Power is given their
Proctors first to demand, receive, and obtain their principal Stalls,
and next to tender their Helms, and Swords, to be hung up in the Choir
of _Windsor_, according to Custom: And for clearer Information of the
course of this Ceremony, that the Sovereign impowered his
Commissioners, first to give the Deputy Possession of his Principal’s
Stall, and after to receive the Atchievements, and place them over it:
This is to be considered as a Memorial of the Knights being installed a
Companion of the Order, and ’tis incongruous in the Rules of Honour to
have the Sign or a Memorial of an Action precede the Action it self.

Again, the Statutes expresly provide, that the Knights Atchievements
shall not be hung up, till the Duties and Fees enjoined are first
discharged; and ’tis certain, there are no Fees due, nor can be
claimed, till the Ceremonies on which they become due are entirely
finished. But to clear all Doubts which may arise upon this Point, it
was at a Chapter held at _White-Hall_, the fourth of _February_, 22
_Car._ II. ordained, _That not any of the Atchievements of an elect
Knight’s Stall be set up in the Chappel at_ Windsor, _before he be
installed, and the Fees of Installation paid_.

And though this was the Practice anciently, yet were the Atchievements
always prepared and brought to _Windsor_, and set before the elect
Knight’s Stall; and in case of his not coming to receive Installation,
then, being no otherwise placed, they might be the easier removed
without the Choir, in as decent manner as could be, so that the Honour
of Knighthood might be preserved entire; nevertheless, to be retained
for publick Use, and the Benefit of the College.

Where mention is made in the Annals of any Person employed to set up
the Atchievements of a Knight, it is to be understood that he was his
Proctor, and installed on his behalf: And there appears but one single
Instance where one Person hath hung up a Knight’s Atchievements, when
another was installed for him; and this happen’d 14th of _August_,
_Anno_ 29 _Hen._ VI. where the Lord _Rivers_ having been elected to the
Stall of the Lord _Hungerford_, his Sword and Helm were soon after
(sent) hung up by _William Bobden_, his Esq; and _Guyen Herald_, and he
installed the 30 _October_ following, by Sir _William Crafford_ his
Proctor; but this was contrary to the Law of the Order.

Where the setting up of a Knight’s Atchievements is barely mentioned,
without taking notice of the Installation, it is to be understood, that
such Knight’s Installation was also solemniz’d at that Time: As in the
case of the King of _Portugal_, of whom the Annals only note, that he
had taken care to set over his Stall, Helm, Sword, and Banner, and all
things belonging thereto, at the Feast at _Windsor_, 2 _Henry_ VI. In
what manner these Atchievements are fixed, appears by the Statutes; the
Helm and Crest to be set over each Knight-Companion’s Stall, and the
Sword to hang directly under them; but the Plate to be nailed to the
back of the Knight’s Stall.




                               CAP. XIII.

            _The Installation of a Knight-Subject by Proxy._


                _The Original Cause of making Proxies._

§ 1. There was no liberty given at the Institution of the Order, for a
Knight-Subject to be installed by his Proctor or Deputy; but on the
contrary, in the Founder’s Statutes was inserted this express
Prohibition. _That none of the Knights elect should be permitted to be
installed by_ Proxy, _unless he were a Stranger_. And this Law
continued unaltered till the Reign of _Henry_ V. when _John_ Duke of
_Bedford_, the Sovereign’s Deputy for holding the Feast of St. _George_
at _Windsor_, 7 _Henry_ V. and other the Knights-Companions then
present, took it into Consideration; that where a Knight-Subject,
elected into the Order, was at that Time employed beyond Sea, in the
Service of his Prince, and likely to continue in that Service some
time, it was agreed, that the said Duke should make an Address to the
Sovereign, by Letters under the Seal of the Order, (he being then
employed in the War against _France_,) that in the like cases his
Majesty would Ordain, _That_ Knights-Subjects _might, as well as_
Strangers, _be admitted into the_ Order, _notwithstanding the Clause in
the Statutes_.

It likewise appears from that _Letter_, as well as from the Blue-Book,
that Sir _John Grey_, and the Lord _Bourchier_, had been installed at
the aforesaid Feast, by their several Proxies; which the Sovereign’s
Deputy concurr’d with, out of great Respect to their Persons; lest by a
too rigid Observance of the Statutes, by their absence in the Wars,
where they were then loyally employed, and might meet their Deaths,
they should want the desired Suffrages of those Masses, ordained to be
Sung for a defunct Knight; as had happen’d to several by unsuspected
delays. But to clear this matter, for the future it was Decreed, 9
_Hen._ V. That where any elect Knight was actually in the Sovereign’s
Wars, or otherwise employed Abroad on his Sovereign’s Affairs, he
should possess the Privilege of a Stranger in this particular; which
Decree was added to King _Henry_ Vth’s Statutes. And it was soon after
enjoined the elect Knight, on notice of his Election, to take care
timely to appoint his Proctor, that he might enjoy the Rights and
Privileges of a Founder: Such an Obligation was laid on Sir _John
Falstaff_, who, at the reception of the Garter, was in _France_,
employed in the Sovereign’s Service.

But King _Henry_ VIII. besides his Confirmation of this Decree, for
allowance of a Proxy in the aforesaid two Cases, farther enlarged it,
to such as the Sovereign should either Command, or permit Licence to be
installed by Proxy, which is to be understood of Knights elect within
the Kingdom, as well as those beyond Sea: By Virtue of which Clause,
the elect Knight, the Earl of _Dorset_ being Sick, 1 _Car._ I. obtained
the Sovereign’s Licence to be installed by his Deputy Sir _Richard
Young_.


                       _Letters of Procuration._

§ 2. It is observed before, out of the _Registrum Chartaceum_, that Sir
_John Robesart_, elected into the Order by King _Henry_ V. was
installed by Virtue of his Letter Missive, sent to Sir _Thomas Barr_
his Proxy; but the same Register calls it, in another Place, a
sufficient Procuration under his Seal of Arms, enabling him to perform
the Ceremony of his Installation.

The Copy of this Instrument is not extant; but that Letter Missive Sir
_John Grey_ directed to Sir _John Lisle_, to take Possession of his
Stall, and by Virtue of which he was installed, _tells him he had
Chosen him for his Proxy, and to take his Stall for him in his Name_,
&c. And omitting other Precedents, doubtless, in the case of a
Knight-Subject, the Sovereign may, if he pleases, nominate and appoint
a Proxy for Installation, where the elect Knight hath not done it
himself; for here, all those Considerations of grand Respect, Forms of
the Oath, _&c._ constantly afforded to Strangers, have no Place; which
is evident from the Sovereign’s Letters of Summons to the Commissioners
named for Installation of the Lord _Grey_, 4 and 5 _Phil._ and _Mar._
who at that time was Prisoner in _France_, and his Deputy Sir _Humphry
Radcliffe_, is therein mentioned to be appointed by the Sovereign
herself.

The first Precedent of Letters of Procuration, or Deputation, drawn
into a solemn Form, is that made by Sir _William Phelip_, 5 _Hen._ V.
by which, having obtained the Sovereign’s Licence, he impowers two
Knights, Sir _Andrew Butrely_, and Sir _John Henington_, or either of
them, as their Business would permit, to supply his Place, and take
Possession of his Stall, in the Choir at _Windsor_.


                      _Qualifications of a Proxy._

§ 3. The Qualifications of a Proctor, nominated by a Knight-Subject,
are the same with those requisite in the Proctor of a Stranger, of
which something will fall in our Way hereafter; I shall therefore only
in general observe here, that to neither Knight-Subject, nor Stranger,
the Proctor is to be under the Degree of a Knight, enobled with Arms,
and of an honest and untainted Reputation; it being judg’d proper
chiefly in this Point, that a Knight-Subject should exactly observe the
same Rule enjoined to Strangers; in respect of which, it is very
remarkable, that Sir _William Lisle_, though one of the Alms-Knights,
yet in Degree a Knight, was not refused to be Proctor to Sir _John
Grey_, 7 _Hen._ V.


                    _Preparations for Installation._

§ 4. The Day for Installation of a Knight-Subject by Proxy, being
appointed by the Sovereign, there are to be provided for him, first, a
Commission for Installation, which by the Chancellor of the Order is
presented to the Sovereign for his Sign Manual; to which is after
affixed, the Seal of the Order: And appoints, 1. To conduct the Proctor
to _Windsor-Castle_. 2. To put him in Possession, as from the
Sovereign, of the Stall assigned his Principal. 3. To invest him with
all the Benefits, Honours, Prerogatives, Franchises, and Liberties
thereto belonging. 4. To receive his Mantle, Helm, and Sword, and set
them up in their appointed Places. 5. To add thereto all usual
Ceremonies. 6. Lastly, an Injunction to all the Knights to permit all
the Solemnity punctually to be performed: An ancient Precedent of this
is found 5 _Hen._ V. in the case of Sir _John Falstaff_: Also 2 _Edw._
IV. at the Installation of the Earl of _Worcester_, and other elect
Knights, by their Proxies.

Of later Times, the Commissions granted on such Occasions differ from
those made for the Personal Installation of the Knights themselves,
only by premising the Cause of their Principal’s Absence, and Service
he is then employed on; authorizing the Commissioners to admit the
Proxy into his Stall: Likewise where the Installation is performed by
two or more Commissioners, the Sovereign directs Letters to each of
them, giving notice of the intended Solemnity, and requiring them to
attend at a Day prefixt, to the end the Proxy may be put into
Possession of his Principal’s Stall.

And as there is, upon admission of an elect Knight, installed by Proxy,
the same ground for removal of Stalls, as in personal Installations; so
the Sovereign issues out Warrants to _Garter_, some time before the
Solemnity, to remove the Atchievements and Plates, as usual, and place
them in the Order such Warrants direct. Anciently the Stall for an
elect Knight, was assigned in the Commission issued for Installation,
as in the case of Sir _Henry Inghouse_, Proctor to Sir _John Falstaff_,
5 _Henry_ V.

The rest of the Particulars to be provided against the Day of
Installation, are at the Knight’s own Charge, and are agreeable with
those in Personal Installations.


                   _Proceeding to the Chapter-House._

§ 5. The next thing to be consider’d, is the Proxies Place in
proceeding to the Chapter-House, and this is immediately after the
Provincial _King of Arms_, because as yet he hath not taken Possession
of his Principal’s Stall; which done, it gives him a Place in his
return according to its Dignity. In this Order the Proctors of the
Marquiss of _Newcastle_, and the Earl of _Bristol_, proceeded
(Bare-headed,) 13 _Car._ II.

And though this be the Proctor’s usual Place in this Proceeding, yet
Sir _Henry Sidney_, Proctor to the Earl of _Warwick_, 5 _Eliz._
proceeded immediately before the elect Knights; which is the only
instance of that kind.

Lastly, the Proctor, as in the case of an elect Knight, passes into the
East-Isle, behind the High-Altar, as soon as he comes within St.
_George_’s _Chappel_, while the Sovereign, Lieutenant, or
Commissioners, proceed into the Chapter-House, and there reposeth
himself till he is sent for in; as in the case of the Marquiss of
_Newcastle_ and Earl of _Bristol_ above: But if the Proxy pass not in
the Proceeding, he then goes privately to his Place, before the
Proceeding sets forward.


                  _Transactions in the Chapter-House._

§ 6. After the Chapter is opened, the first thing done, is for _Garter_
to present the Commission or Commissions, which he carried in the
Proceeding thither, as well that for the Lieutenancy, (if a Lieutenant
held the Feast,) as of Installation, for admitting a Proxy, the Order
of which is observed before.

The Letters of Procuration, or Deputation, are next read, after which
the Proxy is sent for into the Chapter-House by _Garter_, who conducts
him to the Door, and there the Commissioners, or Assistants, or
Knights-Companions, receive him. But 5 _Eliz._ Sir _Henry Sidney_
exhibited his Deputation, after he was called in: Or sometimes the
Proxy produces his Deputation before the Proceeding to the
Chapter-House, as Sir _George Howard_, Deputy to the Earl of _Bedford_,
did, 6 _Eliz._ And in such case there is no need of admitting the Proxy
into the Chapter-House, but that he may stay without, till the
Sovereign, his Lieutenant, or Commissioners, are past into the Choir,
and he sent for thither; at which time the _Mantle_ was wont to be laid
on his right Arm at the Chapter-House Door, by the Knights-Companions
appointed to introduce him.

Anciently, as soon as the Proxy was admitted into the Chapter-House,
and the Letters of Procuration were read, the _Mantle_ of his Principal
was usually laid on his right Arm by the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, or
Commissioners, and part of it spread on the Proxies Shoulders, the
Escutcheon of St. _George_ lying uppermost, and the Cordons laid fair
to be seen; and in this manner he bore it in the Proceeding to the
Stall, where he held it till Service was ended; but ’tis now ordered
otherwise, as by the direction of King _Charles_ II. that the _Mantle_
should be born on the left Arm.

But 5 _Eliz._ the Earl of _Warwick_’s Proctor had the Mantle born
before him into the Choir by _Garter_, in the same manner as is usual
to Knights Personally installed; and not delivered him, till he had
taken the Oath; and at the delivery thereof, the Words of Admonition
were pronounced by the _Register_; as it was observed to the Proxies of
the Marquiss of _Newcastle_, and the Earl of _Bristol_, 13 _Car._ II.


                       _Proceeding to the Choir._

§ 7. The Proxy proceeds from the Chapter-House Door, between the
Sovereign’s Commissioners, _&c._ But touching the Order of this
Proceeding, so much has already been said, that we shall give but one
Instance, _Anno_ 6 _Elizabeth_.


            1. Verger.
            2. Alms-Knights.
            3. Officers of Arms.
            4. Officers of the Order.
            5. Lord _Hunsdon_, Proctor to the Lord _Cobham_.
            6. Earl of _Bedford_.


                  _Ceremonies performed in the Choir._

§ 8. The Proceeding having entered the Choir, the Commissioners, _&c._
conduct the Proxy into the lower Stall, directly under that designed
for his Principal, where the _Register_ reads the Words of the Oath,
while the Proxy, laying his Hand on the Book, repeats them after him,
and Kisses the Book: And this Oath his Deputation impowers him to take,
in the Name of his Principal; the Form of the Oath having no difference
from the Oath taken Personally by an elect Knight.

The Oath being taken in this solemn manner, the Proctor is led up to
the Stall of his Principal, where both the Knights, who conducted him
into the Choir, first take the _Mantle_, and lay it on his Arm, next
laying their Hands on him, in the Name of his Lord and Master, from
whom he received his Deputation, set him down therein: And so the
Ceremony of Installation being fully ended, the Service of the Church
begins.

If the Installation be performed in the Morning, there is an Offering
of Gold and Silver; at which time the Proxy in his turn comes from his
Principal’s Stall, and stands before it, and when the Sovereign, or the
Lieutenant for him, and for himself, or else the Commissioners, and the
rest of the Knights-Companions present, have offered, then the Proxy
(being joined to the Knight, sitting in the opposite Stall, if present
at the Solemnity, and having two Officers of Arms before them,)
proceeds to the High Altar, and there offers both Gold and Silver; and
then returns, and takes his Stall as the rest do. In this manner the
Earl of _Warwick_’s Proxy, joining with the Earl of _Northumberland_,
installed at the same time, proceeded to the Offering, 5 _Eliz._ As
likewise the Proctor to the Earl of _Bedford_, with the Lord _Hunsdon_,
6 _Eliz._

The Ceremony of the Offering being finished, the Service of the Church
goes on, which being over, the Proceeding returns in the same Order it
came to the _Chapter-House_, except, that now the Proxy takes his Place
according to the Dignity of his Stall. But in regard the _Statutes_
expresly declare; That after the Proxy hath been admitted to his
Principal’s Stall, he shall neither wear the _Mantle_, nor have any
Voice in Chapter, nor enter there in the absence of him that sent him;
so that it was the ancient Practice to take off the _Mantle_ from his
Arm at the _Chapter-House_ Door, in his return from the Choir, and
delivered to the _Verger_ of the Chappel, though sometimes to the
_Sexton_, at other times to _Garter_, also to the _Black-Rod_, who hath
taken it from off the Proxies Arm, and carried it into the
Chapter-House; this done, the Proxy retires privately out of the
Proceeding to his Lodging.

It appears however, but by what indulgence is not mentioned, that
though _Garter_ took the _Mantle_ from Sir _Henry Sidney_, 5 _Eliz._ at
the Chapter-House Door, on the Evening he returned from Installation;
yet the next Morning he rode in the Procession to the Chapel, the
Celebration of the Feast of St. _George_ continuing, with the _Mantle_
on his right Arm; and having entered the Choir, took his Principal’s
Stall, bearing likewise the Mantle in the grand Procession, at the
Offering of Money, and during Divine Service, and from the Chappel to
the Castle to Dinner: And the like in the Afternoon of the said Day, he
rode on Horse-back in the Proceeding to the Chapter-House Door, but
there the _Mantle_ was taken from him, and laid within upon the Table,
whilst he retired into the East-Isle of the Chappel, and at the rising
of the _Chapter_, it was again delivered to him, whence he proceeded in
his Principal’s Place to the second Vespers.

Next Morning, the _Lieutenant_, and _Assistants_, having ended the
Chapter, the _Mantle_ was again laid on his Arm, and in that manner he
passed to his Principal’s Stall, and afterwards offered, as on the
Feast Day. The Morning Service ended, the _Lieutenant_ and _Assistants_
returned to the Chapter-House Door, where they put off their _Mantles_,
and at the same time the _Sexton_ of the College receiv’d the Mantle
from him.


                          _The Grand Dinner._

§ 9. At Dinner the Proxy sits with the Lieutenant or Commissioners, and
takes Place where his Principal should sit if he were present; and this
was so observed at the Installation of the Earl of _Warwick_, 5 _Eliz._

The Stile of the Knight installed by Proxy, is proclaimed in _French_,
or _English_, in the usual Form and Place, as 25 _Hen._ VIII. at the
Installations of the Earls of _Beaumont_ and _Newblanke_, by their
Proxies; for they were Knight-Subjects, though not to the Sovereign,
and therefore not improper to be made use of as an Instance. To
conclude, the Proctor is to take care that the Atchievements and Plate
of his Principal are set up in their proper Places, which appears not
only from the ancient Letters of Procuration, but also by Commissions
of Installation, which appoint that the Sovereign’s Deputy should
receive from the Proctor his Principal’s Helm and Sword, (for there is
no mention of the Banner till afterwards,) and place it over his Stall.




                               CAP. XIV.

             _The Signification of Election to Strangers._


          _Within what time, and in what manner, Certificate
                      is made of their Election._

§ 1. In regard that Strangers elect, are for the most part Sovereign
Princes, whole Affairs obliged them to abide in their own Dominions,
and very rarely permitted them to receive Personal Installation, it was
thought fit to allow them several Privileges, by the Founder of this
most _Noble Order_, and principally, that of giving previous and timely
Notice of their Elections, and convenient time of consideration for
Acceptance; affording Investiture in their own Countries, and
permitting their Installations to be performed at _Windsor_ by their
Proxies or Deputies.

It was therefore by the _Statutes_ ordained: That when any such should
be chosen into the _Order_, they should be certified of their Elections
by the Sovereign; and besides, that, at his Charge, the _Garter_ should
be sent over to them, with the _Mantle_ and _Statutes_ of the _Order_,
Sealed with the common Seal; so that they might have notice, at least
within four Months from the time of Election, to the end they might
advise and determine with themselves, from the Tenor of the _Statutes_,
whether they would receive the Honour of this most _Noble Order_.

In Pursuance of these Directions, it became customary for the
Sovereign, when he sent his Letters, to send also, and that by way of
solemn Embassy, the Habit and Ensigns of the _Order_, with a Book of
the _Statutes_; and in case the Election were accepted, Investiture
might be received before the return of the Persons, by whom the Habit
was sent. As upon the Elections of _Edward_, King of _Portugal_, at the
Feast of St. _George_, 13 _Hen._ VI. the Duke of _Urbin_, 14 _Edw._ IV.
and several others.

The right of bearing these Letters signifying Election, and returning
the Strangers Answer, belongs to _Garter_, by the Constitutions of his
Office. And though Certificate of Election was to be made within four
Months from the time of Election, yet King _Henry_ VIII. added this
necessary Clause: _That when the Sovereign had any great or high
Impediment, he might defer certifying the Election till a more
convenient Time_. As may be seen in the case of _Frederick_ III.
Emperor of _Germany_, in the time of _Henry_ VI. who having been
elected 35 of that King, had not Letters sent him to signify it till
the next Year. It likewise appears, that Letters to the same Effect
were then likewise dispatched to the King of _Arragon_, the Duke of
_Brunswick_, and King of _Poland_, who had been elected eight Years
before.

And yet we find it recorded, that the _Habit_ and _Ensigns_ of the
_Order_ were sent by special Ambassadors to all three, 34 _Hen._ VI.
two Years before: But perhaps this ought to be understood of their
being but then design’d, and ordered to be sent, and on second Thoughts
might be stopped, or if sent, by some accident might have miscarried;
otherwise it seems needless to have sent other Letters to give notice
of their Election two Years after: But to clear this matter, we after
find a second mention of sending the _Habit_ and _Ensigns_ to the King
of _Poland_, 37 _Hen._ VI. by which it is demonstrable, that the first
Embassy took no Effect.

It does not appear that King _Hen._ VIII. or any of his Successors,
ever made use of that Liberty granted by the aforesaid Article of his
_Statutes_, for deferring the significatory Letters of Election beyond
the time appointed by the _Statutes_ of Institution, as we find by the
many Instances of that kind. _Francis_ the first King of _France_ was
elected _October_ 21. 19 _Hen._ VIII. and was installed the 25
_January_ following; so that ’tis plain, the Letters of Notice must
needs have been dispatched within the limited Time. _James_ V. of
_Scotland_, who was elected 20 _Jan._ 26 _Hen._ VIII. had notice of
Election immediately sent him; and _Hen._ II. of _France_, having been
elected 24 _April_, 5 _Edw._ VI. had Letters of Signification sent him
in _May_ following; and so in all Examples since. And when King
_Charles_ II. elected any Stranger whilst he was Abroad, Letters of
Signification were sent them immediately after.


      _Of notice given of an Election, before sending the Habit._

§ 2. Here it is to be observed, with how much caution, more than the
former, the Statutes of King _Henry_ VIII. Ordain, _to send Letters
that signify Election, and the Book of Statutes only at first_; but not
the _Garter_ and _Mantle_, till the _elect Stranger_, having had time
to consult the Statutes, certifies his acceptance of the _Order_; and
then, and not before, it is Decreed to send a solemn Embassy with the
whole Habit, _George_, and _Collar_: And consonant to this, the
Practice hath sometimes been. As in the case of _Henry_ II. King of
_France_, 5 _Edw._ VI. _Emanuel_, Duke of _Savoy_, 1 and 2 _Phil._ and
_Mar._ and in that of _Frederick_, Duke of _Wirtembergh_, to whom Queen
_Elizabeth_ sent Letters soon after his Election, and he returned
Thanks, and Acceptation, by his two Ambassadors, who received Promise
of sending the whole Habit soon after; however, the same were not sent
during her Life.


               _Notice of Election sent with the Habit._

§ 3. When the Sovereign hath been well assured of the _elect
Stranger’s_ acceptance, the same Embassy (as anciently before adding
this Clause,) dispatched both Ceremonies. The Sovereign’s Letter
signifying Election, being first presented, together with the Book of
Statutes, and an acceptance declared, then within few Days, the whole
Habit of the _Order_ was solemnly delivered.

And thus it was directed soon after the Election of _James_ V. King of
_Scots_, to the Lord _William Howard_, sent on that Embassy; and in
like manner, at the Election of _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_, 1
_Jac._ I. to the Earl of _Rutland_ sent on that Embassy. As also to
_Gustavus Adolphus_, King of _Sweden_, and _Henry_, Prince of _Orange_,
within two Months, their Elections following on _April_ 24. 3 _Car._ I.
and the date of the Commission for delivering the Order being on _June_
24. following.


_The manner and order of the delivery of these Letters, signifying
  Election, when the Habit is sent, is thus._

“First, The Ambassador and _Officer of Arms_ having notice given them
of the first Audience, present themselves to the _Stranger Prince_, in
the accustomed manner of Ambassadors; and delivering the Sovereign’s
_Letters Missive_, with all due Reverence, the Ambassador, after some
short general Compliment from the Sovereign, signifying that his
Master, and the Honourable _Society_ of the _Garter_, in respect of his
renowned Prowess, Valour, Virtues, _&c._ and to establish and encrease
the Amity that is between them, hath elected him into the most Noble
_Order_ of St. _George_; and that Sovereigns do never elect any
Stranger, but such as they highly Honour; and therefore earnestly
desires it may be accepted as a true Testimony thereof: To which end
the Sovereign hath sent him over, and his Herald there present, to
perform the due Ceremonies.”

But this Commission of Legation hath sometimes been obstructed by the
multitude of Affairs lying on the Sovereign’s Hands, particularly in
the Time of _Car._ I. when engaged in that unnatural Civil War; so that
when they sent their Letters of Signification, it was thought fit to
Commissionate their Agent, or Resident at the Prince’s Court, and
_Garter_ Principal _King of Arms_, to deliver part; but the two chief
and most peculiar _Ensigns_ of the _Order_, _viz._ the _Garter_ and
_George_, deferring the solemn Embassy till a more convenient Season.
The first Precedent of which kind, was 10 _Jac._ I. when Sir _Ralph
Winwood_, and _William Seagar_, Esq; _Garter_, were Commissioned to
deliver only, for the present, the Garter and George, to _Maurice_,
Prince of _Orange_, five Days after his Election; and so to _Charles_,
Prince Palatine of the _Rhine_, 9 _Car._ I. and to _William_, Prince of
_Orange_, and the Duke _de Espernon_, the same Reign. And so likewise
during the unhappy Exile of King _Charles_ II. it was usual, for want
of more conveniency, to present the elect Knight, in confirmation of
his Election, whether he were _Stranger_, or _Subject_, with the
_Garter_, _George_, _Ribband_; and sometimes a St. _George_’s _Cross_,
radicated within a _Garter_, to be fixed on the left Shoulder of their
Cloaks, or upper Garments. But these things after returned into their
proper Channel, as we may see in several cases since, of which we need
not instance more, than that of the present Sovereign, and his Royal
Highness the Prince: The former at a Chapter of the most Noble _Order_,
held at _Kensington_, 18 _June_, 1701. 13 _Will._ III. was elected, and
on the 21 _June_, the Sovereign, by Commission under the Great Seal of
the _Order_, constituted the Earl of _Macclesfield_, and _Gregory
King_, Esq; _Lancaster Herald_, (then Deputy Garter King of Arms,) to
carry the _Habit_ and _Ensigns_, and to invest his then Electoral
Highness therewith. The next Day after their arrival, at a private
Audience, his Electoral Highness received the _Garter_ and _George_,
with the usual Formalities; and two Days after, _viz._ 24 _August_, was
solemnly invested with the whole Habit of the _Order_. On 13 _March_
following, 1702-3. he was installed at _Windsor_ by his Proxy
_Charles_, Lord _Mohun_, with the accustomed Ceremonies. The same
_Order_ was observed at the Election of his Royal Highness the Prince,
4 _April_, 5 Queen _Anne_; when the Lord _Halifax_, and _John
Vanbruge_, Esq; _Clarenceux_ King of _Arms_, (in the room of Sir _Henry
St. John_, Knight Garter,) were Commission’d to carry the _Habit_ and
_Ensigns_. They had their first Audience, on this occasion, of the
Prince, the 31 _May_, who afterwards received the Garter and lesser
George, and on 2 _June_ following, was invested with the whole _Habit_
and _Ensigns_ of the _Order_.


                     _Certificates of Acceptation._

§ 4. After delivering the Sovereign’s Letter, signifying Election by
the Ambassador, and the _elect Stranger_ doth readily accept the
_Order_, he is obliged, by the Statutes, to return the Sovereign a
Certificate of such his Acceptance, and desire of Ratification. And
’tis observable, before the additional Clause made by King _Henry_
VIII. this ceremonious Course had been the Practice of ancient Times;
and both expected from, and observed by the King of _Denmark_, who
having been elected, 6 _Hen._ V. was the eighth of the same King taken
notice of for not returning, before that Time, an Answer, whether he
accepted the Honour or no: And it appears, before the next Feast of St.
_George_, he sent over his ready Acceptance, both of the Honour of
Election, and of the Ensigns of the _Order_; and thereupon Directions
were given for his Installation by the Lord _Fitz Hugh_, his Proxy.

But for an instance, after the said additional Clause, there is one
remarkable enough, in the Preamble of the Sovereign’s _Credential
Letters_ to the Duke of _Savoy_, 1 and 2 _Phil._ and _Mar._ sent with
the Habit and Ensigns of the _Order_; in which it appears: _That the
Sovereign having given notice of his Election into this most Noble_
Order, _he had returned back his cheerful and ready Acceptance of, and
singular Satisfaction in the said Choice; and therefore cordially
wished it might attain its due Effect_.

In succeeding Times it was thought necessary, where the whole _Habit_
was sent to a _Stranger_, together with the Sovereign’s Letters of
notice, to make a provisional Decree, (which passed, 13 _Car._ I) _That
Garter, and all others, whom he pleased to join in Commission with him,
should be most punctually careful, that they delivered not the_ Ensigns
_of the_ Order _to any_ elect Stranger, _till they were satisfied, by
his_ Letters Patent, _of his kind and grateful Acceptance thereof_; or
in case of refusal, to forbear their Presentation.

And the same care was also taken, where only the _Garter_ and _George_
were sent; as appears by the Instructions sent, 19 _Car._ I. to Sir
_William Boswel_, then appointed by the Sovereign to present those two
principal Ensigns to _William_, Prince of _Orange_; where, among other
things, he is expressly commanded, _To take a Testimonial from the said
Prince, of his kind Acceptation thereof, before he should deliver those
Ensigns of Honour to him_: So likewise in the Institutions of the same
Date, for delivery of the _Garter_ and _George_ to the Duke _de
Espernon_.


                     _Of an Election not accepted._

§ 5. That sometimes this Honour hath not been accepted, appears in the
single case of _Philip_ II. Duke of _Burgundy_, who having been elected
by King _Henry_ V. then in _France_, had not, _Anno_ 1 _Henry_ VI. sent
his Answer. It was therefore concluded on at the Feast of St. _George_,
held at _Windsor_ the said Year, by _Humphry_, Duke of _Gloucester_,
then Deputy to the Sovereign, and by, and with the unanimous consent of
the _Knights-Companions_ present, to send Letters to the said elect
Duke, by which he was desired to know, whether he gave his Acceptance
or no? The Duke of _Burgundy_, it seems, made no Answer to this Letter:
It was therefore again debated at the next Year’s Feast, and then
thought fit, to send Persons over to him with the Nomination, who
should press him for his final Answer. And then it appears, that the
said Duke weighing the Statutes, and reflecting on the Quarrels between
the Duke of _Gloucester_, and the Duke of _Brabant_ his Unckle, made a
plausible Excuse, refusing the Election, lest he should be forced
either dishonourably to violate the pious Constitutions of the _Order_,
or the obligations of Alliance; and upon this they proceeded to a new
Election.

But this is the only instance of this kind; and it hath been the
constant way of all elect Strangers, not only to accept, but to receive
with the highest Marks of Satisfaction, the notice of their Election,
and the Investiture of the _Order_.




                                CAP. XV.

_The Investiture of Strangers, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order._


        _The Time for sending the Habit and Ensigns unlimitted._

§ 1. Though the Statutes of the _Order_ appoint and prefix a time,
wherein the Sovereign’s Letters of notice to an elect Knight ought to
be sent, yet as to the sending a solemn Embassy with the Habit and
Ensigns, they do not limit any certain time, but leave it wholly to the
Sovereign’s Pleasure, wherein his own Interest and Conveniency, as well
as that of the _elect Stranger_, is to be considered.

Nevertheless, the Statutes of Institution direct, that this Legation
shall be dispatched with convenient speed; which must be interpreted to
refer both to the Sovereign’s conveniency of sending, and the
_Stranger’s_ capacity of receiving.

And therefore we find it six Years after the Election of the Kings of
_Arragon_ and _Poland_, and the Duke of _Brunswick_, e’er we meet with
the first notice of the Sovereign’s determination of sending over the
Habit: For they having been elected 4 _August_, 28 _Hen._ VI. the
preparations for the _Legation_ were not made till the thirty fourth
Year of the same King; and doubtless some cause, within the limits of
that conveniency allowed to the Sovereign by the aforesaid Article of
the _Statutes_, or the accident of Miscarriage might fall out;
particularly in respect to the King of _Poland_, because three Years
after the former Order of _Legation_, we find new Directions issued for
sending the Ensigns of the _Order_ to him.

But in King _Henry_ VIIIth’s Body of _Statutes_, this Clause of sending
the Legation with convenient speed, is wholly omitted, and the
Sovereign is not limitted as to the Time; so that the Habit and Ensigns
have happen’d to be sent sometimes sooner, sometimes later; as the
Sovereign has thought convenient; of which sufficient hath been said
already; and we find in two Elections of _Strangers_ in the two late
Reigns, _viz._ that of the present Sovereign and Prince; that the
Legation was sent only a very few Days after their Election.


                 _Preparations made for the Legation._

§ 2. In reference to this solemn Embassy, there are several things to
be provided, before the Ambassadors, or Commissioners, take their
Journey. As, (1.) Credential Letters. (2.) Commission of Legation. (3.)
Warrants for the _Habit_ and _Ensigns_. And (4.) other Necessaries.

The Credential Letters are, as to particulars, drawn suitable to the
present Occasion, by the _Chancellor_ of the _Order_, and directed to
the _Stranger elect_; but the Substance, in general, is, _That the
Sovereign having elected him into the Society of the_ Order, _hath sent
his Ambassadors with full Power to present the_ Habit, _and perform the
Ceremonies due and accustomed, as if himself were present_. And
farther, to desire him, _To give Credit to all that his Ambassadors
shall say, or perform, on his behalf, in reference to their Commission,
as he would do to himself_.

These Letters pass under the Sign Manual of the Sovereign, and Signet
of the _Order_; but it is observable, that these to _Emanuel_, Duke of
_Savoy_, were sign’d both by King _Philip_ and Queen _Mary_.

The _Commission_ of _Legation_ is likewise to be prepared by the
_Chancellor_ of the _Order_, fairly engrossed on Velom, and Sealed with
the _Great Seal_ of the _Order_, the Substance of which, for the most
part, hath been as follows.

First, The Merits and Worthiness of the _elect Stranger_, to deserve
the Honour of _Election_, and the reasons of inducing the Sovereign to
confer the same upon him, are elegantly set forth.

Secondly, The Persons nominated for this Honourable Employment, are
ordained, authorized, and deputed, and therein Stiled, Ambassadors,
Procurators, and special Messengers, and so are acknowledged to be by
the _Stranger elect_, in their Certificates of the Receipt of the Habit.

Thirdly, Their Power, Authority, and special Command, is to address
themselves to the _Stranger elect_, and present, and deliver him from
the Sovereign, the _Garter_, _Mantle_, and other Ensigns of the Order:
Where observe, that there were four or five joined in a Commission, as
it has sometimes happened, then any five, four, three, or two, were of
the Quorum; whereof the Principal of the Embassy was always one.

Fourthly, They were impowered to require from the _Stranger elect_, his
Oath, according to the Form prescribed in the _Statutes_; but this was
a special case, and only inferred in the Commissions of Legation to
_Charles_, Duke of _Burgundy_, 9 _Edw._ IV. and _Ferdinand_, Archdeacon
of _Austria_, 15 _Hen._ VIII. and omitted in all Commissions since that
time.

And lastly, To perform, and dispatch those things, which they should
judge necessary, in the same manner as if the Sovereign were present in
Person; and this Power it was thought fit to allow the Ambassadors, in
case any thing should want to be performed which their Instructions had
not sufficiently provided for.

The first Embassy on this occasion, recorded in the _Blue-Book_, is
that to _Edward_, King of _Portugal_, 13 _Hen._ VI. to whom, for the
greater Dignity of the _Order_, Garter was thought fit, by the
_Chapter_, to be sent alone with the _Habit_ of the _Order_: And hence
is the original of _Garter’s_ Claim to this Employment.

Nevertheless, in succeeding times, as the Order grew into Esteem, some
one of the Knights-Companions was made choice of by the Sovereign to be
Principal in these Legations; as were _Galliard Sieur de Duras_, sent
to _Charles_, Duke of _Burgundy_, 9 _Edw._ IV., _Arthur Plantagenet_,
Viscount _Lisle_, to _Francis_ the first King of _France_, 19 _Hen._
VIII. and others.

Sometimes other Noblemen, or Persons of Quality, though not
Knights-Companions, (yet correspondent to the Degree of the _Stranger
elect_, or to the Esteem the present Interest begat in the Sovereign,)
were employed chief in these Embassies; among whom Sir _Charles
Somerset_, after Earl of _Worcester_, was sent to the Emperor
_Maximilian_, 6 _Hen._ VII. _Henry_, Lord _Morley_, to _Don Ferdinand_,
Prince of _Spain_, 15 _Hen._ VIII. and others.

In Embassies of this nature, it was heretofore usual, to join some
Persons of Rank and Quality, or Office near the Sovereign, in the
Commission; as Sir _John Scot_, Comptroller of the Houshold, and Sir
_Thomas Vaughan_, Treasurer of the Houshold, both joined with the
_Sieur de Duras_ aforesaid: And Sir _Nicholas Carew_, and Sir _Anthony
Brown_, with the Viscount _Lisle_.

To these Person, the Sovereign thought fit sometimes to add a Doctor of
the Law, or a dignified Clergyman, and such as had the Language of the
Country, not only the better to make such Answers to Questions as the
_Stranger elect_ might start, on perusal of the _Statutes_, but
likewise to inform him touching the Institution of the _Order_, or
other Passages relating to the Founder, or matters touching the Honour
of the Garter. Besides, a dignified Clergyman was in those Times
thought proper to Administer the Oath, and pronounce the Words of
Signification, at the Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the
_Order_.

And for these reasons, was _John Russel_, Doctor of the Civil Law, and
Archdeacon of _Berkshire_, joined in Commission with the aforesaid
_Sieur de Duras_, and _Edward Lee_, Doctor in Divinity, Archdeacon of
_Colchester_, and the Sovereign’s Almoner, sent over with the Lord
_Morley_; and others.

But of later Years the Sovereign’s Ambassador, Resident with the
_Stranger elect_, hath supplied this Place; as did Sir _Thomas Smith_,
in the Legation sent over to _Charles_ IX. and Sir _Edward Stafford_,
in that of the _French_ King _Henry_ III. and Sir _Anthony Mildmay_, to
that of _Henry_ IV.

Besides the aforementioned Persons, _Garter_ was always joined in these
Commissions of Legation, not only to keep on Foot his Right, but to
manage the Ceremonious Part; and of this there are so many numerous
Instances as are sufficient to justify the Privilege of his Office, and
maintain the interest of an ancient Right. Besides which, if it were
any way disputed, we find it decreed in a _Chapter_ 13 _Car._ I. _That
the carrying the Ensigns of the Order to_ Stranger Princes, _doth
properly belong to_ Garter.

Besides those Persons joined in the Commission of Legation, there has
frequently been appointed, either _Norroy_, King of Arms, or some one
of the _Heralds_, to go in Quality of an Attendant in this Service, not
only for the Honour of the Sovereign, but of the Stranger who is to
receive the _Habit_, in regard the Ceremonies of Investiture with the
whole _Habit_, require the Assistance of two Officers of Arms, of which
there are some Precedents.

_Lancaster Herald_ attended the Embassy to _Charles_ IX. King of
_France_: _Chester Herald_, and _Rouge Dragon_, Pursuivant at Arms, on
that of _Henry_ III. of _France_. A Herald likewise attended the
Embassy to _Emanuel_, Duke of _Savoy_: _York Herald_, that of
_Maximilian_, the Emperor: And _Somerset Herald_, to _Henry_ IV. of
_France_.

And whereas there went only _Norroy_ to _Christian_ IV. King of
_Denmark_, it was because no more of the Officers of Arms could then be
spared from their necessary Attendance on the Sovereign’s Coronation;
so in the Embassy to _Maurice_, Prince of _Orange_, one Herald
sufficed, because the _Garter_ and _George_ only were sent him, and
consequently there was but little Service then to be performed.

Concerning other Companions, and Attendants, in these Legations, they
are both for Quality and Number such, and so many, as the chief in the
Legation judges sufficient for the Honour of the Sovereign, and the
Dignity of the Embassy; and with these have usually gone several
Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen.

In the third Place, there is to be prepared for these Legations,
Warrants for the Habit and Ensigns of the _Order_; and these are also
to be drawn up by the Chancellor of the _Order_, who is to attend the
Sovereign for his Sign Manual thereto.

One Warrant is to be directed to the Master of the _Great Wardrobe_, to
deliver to Garter the Mantle, with the Escutcheon of St. _George_
within a Garter, embroidered on the left Shoulder, and Tossels
belonging; and also the _Surcoat_ and _Hood_.

There is also another Warrant drawn up, for the delivery of the Ensigns
of the _Order_ to _Garter_, _viz._ the rich _Garter_, and great
_Collar_ of the _Order_, with a George Pendant, and another George
hanging in a blue Ribbond; together with Cases for them, lined with
purple Velvet, and gilt on the outside.

And sometimes these Ensigns have been delivered out of the
_Jewel-House_, to the Herald of Arms, joined in the Legation in
_Garter’s_ stead, as were those sent to _Charles_, King of _Sweden_, 20
_Car._ II. but those provided for _John George_, Duke of _Saxony_, to
Sir _Thomas Higgons_, the Principal in the Legation; for which they
gave their several Receipts.

The Sovereign’s Warrant for the delivery of the Ensigns sent to
_Maximilian_ the Emperor, was directed to the Lord Treasurer, for which
_Garter_ gave his Receipt. But for those sent to the _French_ King,
_Henry_ IV. the Warrant was directed to the Master of the
_Jewel-House_; and out of this Office have all the _Ensigns_ of the
_Order_ been since delivered.

There are several other necessaries to be provided, which may pass as
Appurtenances to the former, and are sometimes incerted in the
Sovereign’s Warrants for the Habit of the _Order_, and at other times
issued by particular Warrants: As a black Velvet Cap with white
Feathers and a Heron Sprig, a Girdle and Hangers with the same coloured
Velvet, with the Surcoat. A Yard of purple Velvet hath usually been
allowed out of the _Great Wardrobe_, for covering the Book of
_Statutes_, sent to the _elect Stranger_: And for the Velom, Writing
and Binding the said Book, there is a Fee paid by the Sovereign to the
_Register_ of the _Order_, which hath generally been proportioned to
the Dignity of the Receiver; for this Officer had allowed him for the
Book sent,


                                                _l._ _s._ _d._
         To the _French_ King, _Henry_ IV.       5    0    0
         To _John Casimir_, Count Palatine       4    0    0
         To the Duke of _Holstein_, 3 _Jac._ I.  3    6    8
         To the King of _Sweden_, 3 _Car._ I.    3    0    0


But to be more particular, we will insert the Bill of Charges for the
Book of _Statutes_, sent to _James_ VI. of _Scotland_, 26 _Hen._ VIII.


                                              _l._ _s._ _d._
 For Velom                                     0    5    0
 For illumining the Arms and Letters           0   10    0
 For Writing                                   1    0    0
 For Binding and Gilding                       0    2    8
 For half a Yard of purple Velvet              0    7    0
 For half a Yard of crimson Sattin             0    7    0
 For the purple Silk for the Laces             0    0    4
 For the white and green Silk for the Seal     0    1    0
 For red Silk for the Strings, and }           0    1    0
     garnishing the Book           }
 For an Ounce and half of Venice Gold          0    5    0
 For shaping, making the Bag, and garnishing   0    3    4
 For red Sarcenet for lining the Bag           0    1    4
 For a Box                                     0    0    8
                                               -----------
                                       Total   3    4    6
                                               -----------


This Book of _Statutes_ ought to be Sealed with the common Seal of the
_Order_, which not only the Institution, but all the other succeeding
Bodies of _Statutes_ appoint. Besides, at a Chapter held at
_White-Hall_, 13 _Car._ I. the Law was confirmed; and thereupon it was
again decreed, That the Book of _Statutes_ sent to any _Stranger
Prince_, should be Sealed with the Great Seal of the _Order_, affixed
to a Label of blue Silk and Gold.

There is also to be provided a large purple Velvet Cushion, to carry
the Robes on, when they are to be presented; this is likewise put into
the Sovereign’s Warrant, and provided by the Master of the _Great
Wardrobe_; usually containing one Yard and quarter in length, adorned
with Fringe, Cauls, and Tossels of Gold and purple Silk, and within it
a Pillow of Fustian filled with Down.

There were two Velvet Cushions prepared for the Service of the Duke of
_Wirtembergh_’s Investiture, 1 _Jac._ I. one of Purple, for the
Sovereign’s State; and another of Crimson, for the Duke; so the same
Year to _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_.

Two _Majesty Escutcheons_ are likewise to be provided, painted in
_Oil_, and gilt with Gold; one to have the Arms of the Sovereign
surrounded with a Garter, under an Imperial Crown; the other of the
_Stranger’s_ Arms, within a Garter also, and such a Crown as is proper
to his Dignity. Both these are to be put in Frames, painted and gilt,
with their several Stiles fairly Written under the Arms, and set on the
back of the Sovereign’s Stall, under the State, as also on the back of
the Stall of the _Stranger elect_: But there were three _Majesty
Escutcheons_ sent over in the Legation to _Henry_, Prince of _Orange_,
in regard that at his Investiture, _Frederick_, Elector Palatine, was
present. In case the chief Person in the Legation be a Knight of the
_Order_, then he is to have a like Escutcheon of his own Arms, set over
his own Stall; for so had the Earl of _Derby_ provided for him at the
Sovereign’s Charge, when he was sent with the Habit to the _French_
King, _Henry_ III.

The remaining Necessaries, are such as relate to the Transportation of
the Habit of the _Order_, _viz._

         One Pair of fine Holland Sheets to fold the Habit in.
         Two sweet Bags of Taffaty to lay amongst them.
         Two Trunks to put the said Parcels in.
         One Sumpter Saddle.

All which are to be provided at the Sovereign’s Charge, and is also his
Gift to the elect _Prince_.

What farther Warrants are to be obtained from the Sovereign, relate to
_Garter_, and such other Officers of Arms, as are appointed to attend
the Legation; as first a Warrant, whereby the Sovereign ascertains a
Warrant for their Diet, and Reward, during their Journey, and till
their return; and on which, most commonly, for greater certainty of its
Payment, the Sovereign’s Privy Seal is obtained.

The Allowance to _Garter_ in the Reign of _Edw._ VI. was ten Shillings
a Day for his Diet, and Ten Shillings a Day more as a Reward: And this
we find allowed to Sir _Gilbert Dethick_, in the Embassy to _Henry_ II.
King of _France_, 5 _Edw._ VI. and the like in his Legation to
_Maximilian_ the Emperor; and to _Frederick_ II. King of _Denmark_, 24
_Eliz._

And when _Clarenceux_ was sent in the Place of _Garter_ (the Office
being void by the Death of the said Sir _Gilbert_) to the _French_
King, _Henry_ III. the same was also allowed him, and commenced nine
Days before his setting out; and of which there are other Precedents.

Of this daily Allowance, _Garter_ hath usually obtained an advance
before-hand, for his better support by the way.

When any of the Heralds were sent in _Garter’s_ Place, the same
Allowances were made them, as if _Garter_ had gone in Person; as had
_Henry St. George_, Esq; _Richmond Herald_, sent with the Earl of
_Carlisle_, to _Charles_, King of _Sweden_, 21 _Car._ I. As also to
_Thomas St. George_, Esq; _Somerset Herald_, sent with Sir _Thomas
Higgins_, to the Duke of _Saxony_, soon after.

As to the Allowance to such Officers of Arms, as are not joined in, but
appointed to attend any of these Legations; it was usually, if a
Herald, the Moiety of what was given to _Garter_: And if a Pursuivant
at Arms, half as much as a Herald.

Agreeable to which, was the Allowance given to _Chester Herald_, and
_Rouge Dragon_ Pursuivant, in the Embassy to _Henry_ II. King of
_France_, 5 _Edw._ VI. and there called the _old Rate_; so also to
_Somerset Herald_, to _Frederick_ II. King of _Denmark_, and the
_French_ Kings, _Henry_ III. and IV. And both the Herald and Pursuivant
had also a proportionable part of their daily Allowances before-hand.

Besides which Allowances mentioned, _Garter_ hath also Allowance for
Postage, both Outward and Homeward, for Himself and Servants; and for
Transportation of the Habit, and other Things necessary for the Voyage.
And this by a Clause added in the Sovereign’s Warrant, is left to
_Garter_ at his return, when he gives in a Bill of particulars,
subscribed with his Hand, to the Treasurer or Chamberlains of the
Exchequer, to have been disbursed by him.

The Warrant to furnish _Garter_, or the _Herald_, with Post Horses, and
convenient Shipping to carry them over, is usually had of the Privy
Council, or Secretary of State; either before, or after the Lord
Ambassador; and is not provided for in the same Ship.


                    _The Ceremonies of Investiture._

§ 3. The Ceremonies performed at a Stranger Prince’s Receipt of the
whole Habit and Ensigns of the Order, are highly Solemn, whether we
consider the manner of Investiture performed by the Sovereign’s
Ambassadors, on the _Festivity_ and _Triumphs_, added by the new
invested Prince.

First, the Commissions joined in the Legation, receiving notice of
their first Audience, are to present themselves in the accustomed
manner of Ambassadors, Garter, or his Deputy, going in breast with the
chief of the Legation, if there be only himself joined in Commission
with the Lord Ambassador, and in this Place _William Segar_, Esq;
_Norroy_ King of Arms, (sent in the room of _Garter_) proceeded with
the Earl of _Rutland_ at their first Audience before _Christian_, IV.
King of _Denmark_.

Being arrived near the _elect Stranger_, they present the Letters,
certifying Election, or their Credential Letters from the Sovereign;
and after some short general Compliment by the Ambassador, he makes
known to him, his Election in the usual Form, which is before
sufficiently spoke of.

After the Formality of this Address is over, and that the Stranger hath
by his Answer accepted of his Election, and consented to the Reception
of the _Order_; the Ambassador immediately delivers him the Book of
_Statutes_, that he may, if he pleases, peruse them before he assume
the Habit, and desires his Consideration thereon. Next, both the
Commissioners in the Legation present him with the _George_ and
_Ribbond_. and put it about his Neck, as in several Instances hath been
shown.

In the interim, before the Day of Investiture, Time is usually set
apart for Conference between the Sovereign’s Ambassador, and some of
the elect Prince’s Council, touching the ordering of the Ceremonies,
and wording the Oath to be by him taken. _Garter_ is likewise to
consider what Places in the elect Prince’s Court are fit to perform the
Ceremony, and to see them made ready, and to instruct his Officers,
what Duties and Services they are to undertake.

If the great Hall, or other large Room, be appointed, there ought to be
prepared a Table, with a rich Carpet, whereon the Habit and Ensigns of
the _Order_ are to be laid, while the Sovereign’s Commission of
Legation is read; another Table should be prepared for the Stranger who
receives the _Order_; and a third for the Sovereign’s Ambassador.

In the Church or Chappel where they are to proceed to hear Divine
Service, a Stall is to be erected under a Cloth of State, on the
Right Hand Entrance of the Choir, for the Sovereign of the _Order_,
wherein is to be fixed the _Majesty Escutcheon_ of the Sovereign’s
Arms; another Stall is also to be placed on the same side of the
Choir for the invested Stranger, at the same distance from the
Sovereign’s Stall, as is that for the elect Stranger in the Choir
at _Windsor_; in which is to be fixt the _Majesty Escutcheon_ of
his own Arms, brought likewise over by _Garter_ or his Deputy; a
third Stall is to be erected for the Lord Ambassador, who (if a
_Knight-Companion_) hath an _Escutcheon_ of his own Arms within a
_Garter_ set over it; for so had the Marquiss of _Northampton_, at
the Investiture of the _French_ King, _Henry_ II. _Anno_ 5 _Edw._
VI. and the Earl of _Derby_, at that of _Henry_ III. under all
these _Escutcheons of Arms_, the Stiles and Titles (fairly Written)
of the _Sovereign_, and each _Knight-Companion_, are to be affix’d.

Where there is no solemn Proceeding to Church, the Sovereign’s
_Escutcheon of Arms_, with his Titles, have been set up at the upper
end of the Room, where the Investiture is performed; so also the
Stranger Knight’s at due distance, as at the Investiture of _Gustavus
Adolphus_, King of _Sweden_, in his Tent at the _Leaguer_, near
_Darshaw_, in _Prussia_, 23 _September_, _Anno_ 3 _Car._ I.

Besides the before-mentioned Preparations; the _Church_ or _Chappel_,
into which the new invested Stranger proceeds, is to be richly adorned,
as we find by several Instances; as at the Investiture of King _Henry_
III. when the Church of _Augustine Fryars_ in _Paris_, was hung with
rich _Arras_, and all the _Choir_ and _Stalls_ with _Cloth of Gold_. On
the Day the Solemnity of Investiture is celebrated, the elect Stranger
sends his Coach, and some Persons of Quality, to Accompany the
Sovereign’s Ambassadors to his Court. At the Investiture of _Henry_,
Prince of _Orange_, _Frederick_, Prince Palatine of the _Rhine_, sat
with the Viscount _Charleton_, in one Boot of the Prince’s Coach, and
Sir _William Segar_ in the other; and were met by the said Prince at
the Foot of the Stairs of his Court, and conducted thence into his
great Chamber.

After such time as the elect Stranger, and the Sovereign’s Ambassadors,
have a while retired; the Stranger usually first enters the Room
appointed for the Ceremony, and stands under his own State, expecting
the coming in of the Ambassadors, and notice thereof being given them,
they (reposing in a Room near) proceed in manner following.

Servants to the Lord Ambassador, two and two.

The Herald in his Coat of Arms, bearing the Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and
Cap, in his Arms; and if a _Pursuivant_ attend the Embassy, he (wearing
his Coat) proceeds before him, bearing part of the said Habit.

_Garter_ vested in his rich Coat of his Sovereign’s Arms, also (but at
the Investiture of the Duke of _Wirtemberg_, he wore his Robe of
Crimson Satten, as did _Clarenceux_, at the Investiture of the _French_
King, _Henry_ III.) bearing on a Cushion the _Garter_, and _Collar_ of
the _Order_, with the great _George_, the Book of _Statutes_, and the
Commission of _Legation_.

Lastly, The Lord Ambassador, or chief in the Embassy, who, if a
_Knight-Companion_, proceedeth in his compleat Habit.

If any other _Knight-Companion_ is present, he also wears his whole
Habit of the _Order_, as did the Constable of _France_, at the
Investiture of the _French_ King, _Henry_ II. The said Constable also
pair’d in the Proceeding with the Sovereign’s Ambassador.

In going up to the Sovereign’s State, they all make three Reverences,
and drawing near, the Ambassadors Servants fall off on either side for
the _Herald_ to pass up to the Table, set before the Sovereign’s State;
whereon (with a single Reverence) he lays the Robes.

Then _Garter_ draws near the Table also, and with a like Reverence
towards the Sovereign’s State deposites the _Ensigns_ of the _Order_.

The Lord Ambassador follows, and makes his Reverence towards the
Sovereign’s State, and after turning to the Stranger elect, and doing
him Reverence, he (or some other fit Person) delivers himself in a
short, but grave, and learned Oration; “in which he not only sets forth
the Praises of the illustrious _Order_, and of the King the Sovereign,
but also the Virtues, the memorable and praise-worthy Actions of the
elect Stranger, to whom the Habit and Ensigns of the _Order_ are sent:
Neither are his Ancestors (if any of them have attain’d the Honour of
this _Order_,) past over in Silence, that thereby his Heart (already
breathing impatience and desire,) may be so much the more inflamed with
an Earnestness to obtain the Honour and Favour of this so great a
Dignity.

“He adds besides, that the Sovereign having well weigh’d these and the
like things in his Mind, and maturely advis’d thereof with his
_Knights-Companions_, they were perswaded and well satisfied in
themselves, to nominate and chuse him before others; to the end that he
might both himself be honoured by the Choice of such a Person, and also
thereby give an increase and addition of Lustre to those renowned
Actions and Virtues, which already were a chief Ornament to him.

“Lastly, He points towards the _Ensigns_ of the _Order_, which he
declares to have been sent by the Sovereign, out of great Love, and
singular Affection, to dignify him therewith, as to a Person to whom he
wish’d as well and honourably as to any other Prince whatsoever, and
withall intreats him kindly to accept thereof, and wear them in
remembrance of the Sovereign and his _Order_.”

This or the like Oration being ended, the Ambassadors present their
Commission of _Legation_ to the elect Stranger, who delivers it to his
Secretary, and he publickly Reads it.

At the before-mentioned Investiture of the _French_ King, _Henry_ II.
the Bishop of _Ely_, one of the Commissioners of the _Legation_, made
the Speech, to which the Cardinal of _Lorrain_ returned Answer in the
said King’s behalf, with all thankful Acknowledgments of the Honour of
the _Order_.

After the Commission is read, _Garter_ presents the Oath fairly
Written, which is administred to the elect Stranger, where, if any
Exceptions were before made and admitted, they must be rehears’d, as we
find it directed in the instructions given for the Investiture of
_James_ V. King of _Scotland_. The Ceremony of the Oath being finish’d,
_Garter_ takes from off the Cushion the Garter, and having kiss’d it,
presents it to the Lord Ambassador, who kneeling down, puts it with all
Reverence on the Stranger’s left Leg, being assisted by _Garter_, who
pronounces these Words of _Signification_.

_Ad laudem atque honorem Omnipotentis Dei, intemeratæ Matris ejus, &
Sancti Georgii Martyris; cinge tibiam tuam hoc insigni Subligaculo,
circumferens in augmentum honoris tui, & in signum ac memoriam
illustrissimi Ordinis, nusquam oblivioni daturus, aut omissurus, quod
eo moneris; ut valeas, inquam & velis in justo bello, quod solum
inibis, stare firmiter, agere fortiter, & feliciter omnino vincere._

This being said, _Garter_ takes the _Surcoat_, and with the Ceremony of
a Kiss, delivers it to the Lord Ambassador, who (after the Stranger
elect hath put off his Cloak or upper Garment, and Sword,) puts it upon
him in this manner: First, The Lord Ambassador begins at the Stranger’s
Right Arm, and _Garter_ (or the _Leiger Ambassador_ if present,)
assists at the left Shoulder. The Stranger being thus vested with the
_Surcoat_, both the Lord _Ambassador_ and _Garter_ gird his Sword about
him, with a Velvet Girdle of the same Colour, at the doing whereof
_Garter_ saith these Words.

_Capito vestem hanc purpuream, ad incrementum honoris, & in signaculum
Ordinis accepti: qua munitus non veteberis pro fide Christi, libertate
Ecclesiæ, pro jure, & oppressorum atque indigentium necessaria
tuitione, sanguinem etiam fundere, nedum fortiter ac strenue dimicare._

After this, _Garter_ takes up the _Mantle_ and _Hood_, which, in like
manner kissing, he delivers to the Lord Ambassador, who invests the
Stranger therewith, and lays the Hood upon his right Shoulder; (the
Train being given into the Hands of some Noble Personage to be born
up,) _Garter_ also pronouncing these Words.

_Accipe Clamidem hanc Cœlici coloris, in signum Clarissimi hujus
Ordinis, & in Augmentum etiam honoris tui, rubeo Clypeo Dominicæ
crucis, uti cernis, insignitam: ut cujus virtute semper ac vigore
protectus per Hostes tutus abeas, eos ubique superare valeas, & pro
clarissimis denique Meritis, post egregiam hanc hujus temporis
Militiam, ad æterna vereque Triumphalia gaudia pertingas._

_Garter_, in the last Place, takes up the _Collar_, and with a Kiss
also presents it to the _Lord Ambassador_, who placeth it about the
Stranger’s Shoulders, and _Garter_ uttereth these Words.

_Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, ad augmentum honoris, & in signum
quoque clarissimi ordinis a te suscepti, cum imagine Sanctissimi
Martyris, & Christi Militis Georgii: cujus præsidio suffultus, Mundi
hujus tam prospera quam adversa sic pertranseas, ut animæ pariter ac
corporis hostibus hic strenue devictis, non Temporariæ modo Militiæ
gloriam, sed & perenis victoriæ palmam denique recipere valeas._ Amen.

When the Ceremony of Investiture is finished, the _Lord Ambassador_
congratulateth the new invested Stranger in the Sovereign’s Name, and
in the Name of all the _Knights-Companions_, and then delivers him his
Velvet Cap, adorned with white Plumes, and the Book of _Statutes_.

The Stranger being thus invested, stayeth a while in the Room, where he
received this Honour, with the Ambassador, and after Complements of
Congratulation between them, he goeth to the Church in a solemn manner,
having the Train of his _Mantle_ born up; at the Entrance into the
Church, all in the Procession make three Reverences, the first towards
the _High Altar_, the next towards the Sovereign’s Stall, and the third
towards the new invested Stranger’s Stall.

The _Lord Ambassador_ proceedeth towards the Seat assign’d for him, and
stands before it till the Stranger hath ascended his Stall, and after
making his Reverences, (as before) takes his; then _Garter_ making the
like Reverences, sits down on a Chair, plac’d for him before the
Sovereign’s Stall.

But the _Herald at Arms_ ought to be often near the Stranger, or else
the _Lord Ambassador_, to inform them of the _Order_ of _Ceremony_,
because _Garter_ is obliged to attend the Sovereign’s Royal Stall.

After a solemn Anthem, _Garter_ passeth in the middle of the _Choir_,
and by a Reverence, first to the invested Stranger, and next to the
_Lord Ambassador_, gives them the Signal for descending, and being both
come down, _Garter_ passeth up before the Stranger to the _High Altar_,
where he makes his Offering of Gold and Silver, being accompanied with
the _Lord Ambassador_, the _Herald_ laying the Cushion whereon he
kneels when he Offers.

But if a _Knight-Companion_ be sent on this _Legation_, then he
proceeds first up to the _Altar_, preceeded by _Garter_, and Offers for
the Sovereign, which done, he returns to his own Stall: Next, the
invested Stranger proceeds up, (preceeded as before,) Offers, and
returns back to his own Stall; afterwards the aforesaid
_Knight-Companion_ proceeds up again, and Offers for himself: And in
this _Order_ was the Offering made when the Emperor _Maximilian_ was
invested at _Vienna_, _January_ 4. _Anno_ 10. _Eliz._

The new invested Stranger having offered, returns to his Stall, and the
_Lord Ambassador_, with three Reverences, takes his Seat, the _Organs,
&c._ playing all the while: When the solemn Service is finish’d, the
Stranger descends again from his Stall, and with the Proceeding before
him, returns in the same Order he came to the Room, where he received
his Investiture.

It’s observable, that the Emperor _Maximilian_, out of a compliance
with the Protestant Religion, caused, on the Day of his Investiture,
all Prayers to Saints incensing, and other Matters and Ceremonies not
used by the Church of _England_, to be wholly omitted at the Service in
his Chappel.

At these great Solemnities, the invested Strangers have heretofore held
most magnificent Feasts, but of late they are not so much in Use: And
when Dinner was ready, they proceeded thither in their whole Habit,
which they wore all Dinner time.

At the Investiture of _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_, _Anno_ 1
_Jac._ I. the Sovereign’s Stiles and Titles of Honour were proclaimed
thrice, (before they sat down to Dinner,) and the said King’s twice;
but when _Maurice_ and _Henry_, Princes of _Orange_, received
Investiture, the Stiles were proclaimed immediately after they were
invested, and in the same Room, the Ceremony being perform’d to both in
the Afternoon.

At the Feast made by _Maximilian_ I. (King of the _Romans_,) Sir
_Charles Somerset_, and Sir _Thomas Wriothesley_, sent on the Embassy,
was admitted to his Table, and sat on his left Hand: On the Day of
Investiture of _Don Ferdinand_, Prince of _Spain_, Arch-Duke of
_Austria_, the Lord _Morley_, and Sir _William Hussey_, sat on his
right Hand at Dinner, and Dr. _Lee_, and the said Sir _Thomas
Wriothesley_, on his left; these four being join’d in the Commission of
_Legation_.

At a Feast on the like Occasion by the _French_ King, _Henry_ II. he
admitted to his Table (beside the Marquiss of _Northampton_, the
principal Person in the _Legation_,) the before-mentioned Constable of
_France_; and all three sat in their full Robes of the _Garter_, which
they put not off till after Dinner. The Cardinal of _Lorrain_ sat also
at the King’s Table, but it was on the other side.

When the Investiture was performed in the Afternoon, then was the Grand
Dinner turn’d into a Supper; as it was at the Investiture of
_Maximilian_ the Emperor, and two of the _French_ Kings; but when
_Henry_, Prince of _Orange_, receiv’d the _Ensigns_ of the _Order_,
there was no Feast at all, but purposely omitted, to prevent the
difference which might have been occasioned by the Precedency and
Place, between Ambassadors drinking of Healths, and other Complements.

On this Solemnity, and the Honour they deriv’d from it, some have
thought fit to transmit the Memory to Posterity, by Medals, with
Inscriptions relating thereto; such were those of Gold and Silver,
which _Frederick_, Duke of _Wirtemberg_, caused to be made; as also
those made by _Charles_, King of _Sweden_.


_Certificates of having receiv’d the_ Habits, _and_ Ensigns _of the_ Order.

§ 4. The magnificent Solemnity of Investiture, _&c._ being compleatly
finish’d, and the Ambassadors having fully performed their Duties
therein; they are yet further to obtain from the new invested Stranger,
before their departure, a publick Instrument, testifying the reception
of the said Habit and Ensigns, Sign’d with his Hand, and Sealed with
his Great Seal; this we find anciently done in several Instances, and
is generally demanded and obtain’d.

Hereupon a Clause to this Effect is usually added, in Instructions
given to Ambassadors; as appears from those to the Lord _Howard_ and
_Garter_, in the Embassy to _James_ V. King of _Scotland_; namely, that
_Garter should remember_ (after the Investiture was performed,) _to
Purchase, and Sollicit a Certificate from the said King, of his
reception of the Order, and taking the Oath, both under his Seal_.

The Form and Substance of these Certificates are much alike; for after
a recital of all the Powers given to the Ambassadors nam’d in the
Commission of _Legation_, the Stranger Prince first makes Certificate
of his receiving, and Investiture with the _Mantle_, _Surcoat_,
_Collar_, and other Ornaments of the _Order_; and that they receiv’d
them from the Sovereign’s Ambassador, with the accustom’d Solemnities.

In some of these Certificates, namely from _Ferdinand_, Prince of
_Spain_, _Anno_ 15 _Hen._ VIII. from _Francis_ I. the _French_ King,
_Anno_ 19 _Hen._ VIII. and from _Gustavus_, King of _Sweden_, _Anno_ 3
_Car._ I. we find the taking the Oath appointed by the Statutes to be
also certified. Of the return of these Certificates, the Annals of the
_Order_ sometimes take notice, and by a Decree, 13 _Car._ I. care was
taken to oblige the Ambassadors to produce these Certificates to the
Sovereign at their return.

The Stranger Prince hath been pleas’d sometimes, to give with the
Certificate, a particular Testimonial of _Garter_’s punctual discharge
of his Duty in the _Legation_, or of the Officer of Arms employed in
his stead; as did _Gustavus_, King of _Sweden_, in the preamble of his
_Diploma_, whereby he testifies the bestowing upon _Henry St. George_,
_Richmond Herald_, the Honour of Knighthood; they have also usually
given _Garter_ Gratuities, either in Money, Diamonds, or some other
Present of great value, of which several Instances might be produced.




                               CAP. XVI.

               _The Installation of a Stranger by Proxy._


            _Touching the Choice and Nomination of a Proxy._

§ 1. After the Stranger is invested, he is enjoin’d by the Statutes (be
he of what State or Condition soever,) to send in eight Months after
his Investiture, either a _Proctor_ or _Deputy_ to be installed in his
behalf, in the Seat assign’d him within the Chappel of St. _George_ at
_Windsor_.

The Time limited for sending in _Henry_ Vth’s Statutes, is but seven
Months; and those of _Henry_ VIII. allow no more; and that not only
after Investiture, but after the Stranger hath certified the Sovereign
of his reception of the _Order_.

By King _Henry_ VIIIth’s Statutes, it’s also provided; _That in case a
Stranger do not send his_ Deputy _or_ Proctor _within seven Months,
without having a reasonable Excuse, and such as should be allowed by
the Sovereign or his Deputy, the Election_ (notwithstanding his former
Acceptation,) _should be also void, except so it be, that the Stranger
be hindred or disturbed by great Affairs, and then might he send his
Excuse to the Sovereign, or his Deputy, within one Month after; and
according as the Sovereign or his Deputy should allow or disallow of
his Excuse, that then the Sovereign or his Deputy might give unto him
four Months of respite more; within which time, if he neither come, nor
send his Deputy to be installed for him, then the said Election should
be void for that time_.

The _French_ King, _Francis_ I. was so earnest for compleating this
Honour, that he dispatch’d his Proctor hither with all the speed he
could, and most of the Stranger Princes have sent their _Deputies_
within the limited time, there being very few Instances to the
contrary, and those were occasioned through the multiplicity of Affairs.

When the _Garter_ and _George_ only have been sent to a Stranger, the
Ceremony of Installation hath been dispenc’d with, till a more
convenient time, as appears from the Instructions of _March_ 4. _Anno_
19 _Car._ I. given at the sending these two principal _Ensigns_ of the
_Order_, to _William_, Prince of _Orange_, and _Bernard de Foix_, Duke
_d’Espernon_, (in regard of the Interruptions then given by the
Rebellion here,) such dispensations, and for the same reason, was King
_Charles_ II. necessitated to give those Strangers whom he honoured
with Election, while he remain’d in Foreign Parts.

Upon the said King’s happy Restauration, among many other things
relating to the _Order_, this particular was taken into consideration,
in reference not only to the Duke _de Espernon_ and Prince _Maurice_,
who were dead, but those Strangers also then living; and at two
_Chapters_ held at _White-Hall_, _Anno_ 13 _Car._ II. directions were
given to _Garter_ to place the _Banners_ and _Atchievements_ of the
surviving Strangers over their respective Stalls; and the Sovereign, by
his supream Power, (induc’d by the impossibilities of the late Troubles
to perform the Installation, and by reason of the time elaps’d since
their Elections,) dispenc’d wholly and absolutely with their
Installations, but at the same time declar’d, that as the like
necessity and conjuncture could never happen again, so he would not, on
any motion or pretence whatsoever, give the like dispensation.

It seems to rest in the pleasure of the Stranger, whether he will chuse
to send over any Person of his own Court, or give his Procuration to
some one of the Sovereign’s Subjects, to receive his Stall, and in his
Name to take Possession of it; the latter of which hath been done
several times, out of desire to favour some of our Nobility with this
Honour, of which many instances might be given.

It hath sometimes happned, that a _Proctor_ for the Installation of a
Stranger, hath been appointed and nominated by the Sovereign of the
_Order_, though the Principal had nam’d another before: Thus it fell
out in the case of _Maurice_, Prince of _Orange_, _Anno_ 10 _Jac._ I.
who having deputed Count _Henry_ his Brother, to be installed for him,
and he having put to Sea in Order thereto, but by reason of contrary
Winds not arriving in _England_ before the Day appointed for his
Installation, the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ ordered that
_Lodowick_ of _Nassau_, Kinsman to the elect Prince, should take
Possession of his Stall on his behalf: A case somewhat like, was that
of _John George_, Duke of _Saxony_, who sent over his Procuration to
_John_, Earl of _Bath_; and he being detained in the West on
extraordinary Occasions, when St. _George_’s Feast was held at
_Windsor_, _Anno_ 23 _Car._ II. wrote to the _Chancellor_ of the
_Order_, to obtain the Sovereign’s Dispensation, for not appearing in
the Name of his Principal; who representing his humble request to the
Sovereign, in a _Chapter_ held on the Eve of the said Feast, he was
pleas’d to grant it, and appointed _Heneage_, Earl of _Winchelsea_, who
perform’d the Service. There is also an ancient Example of this kind,
_Anno_ 9 _Hen._ V. where the Sovereign nominated the Lord _Fitz Hugh_,
_Proctor_ for the King of _Denmark_; which yet was not done, till after
the Sovereign had been certified that the said King had been invested,
and obliged himself by Oath to the observation of the _Statutes_.

In like manner it is recorded, that the Earl of _Cleveland_ was by the
Sovereign appointed Deputy for the Installation of _Gustavus Adolphus_,
King of _Sweden_, and yet not unlike, but this might be with consent of
the said King, though the Annals herein are silent.


                    _The Proctor’s Qualifications._

§ 2. By the Statutes of the _Order_, the _Proctor_, whether he be
nominated by his Principal, or by the Sovereign, must be _Procurator
sufficiens & Idoneas_; that is, such a Person who hath always been
accounted of unblameable Conversation, not branded with any note of
Infamy, but altogether irreprovable. And such was _Dominicus
Franciscus_, _Deputy_ to _Charles_, Duke of _Ferrara_, who in the
_Black-Book_ of the _Order_ is characterized to be a Knight of
incorrupt Fame; nor are we to doubt but that other _Proctors_ to
Strangers were such, though the Testimonials of their Virtues do not
appear in the Annals of the _Order_.

Secondly, The _Proctor_ ought to be a Person correspondent to the State
and Dignity of the Stranger that is invested, which may sufficiently
appear by several Instances; the Emperor _Maximilian_ I. appointed for
his Proxy, the Marquiss of _Brandenburgh_, _Anno_ 6 _Hen._ VII.
_Francis_ I. King of _France_, _Adrian de Fercelin_, Lord of _Bross_,
_Anno_ 19 _Hen._ VIII. and _Henry_ IV. of _France_, _Sieur de Chastes_,
Vice Admiral of _France_, _Anno_ 42 _Eliz._

Thirdly, It is provided that he be a Knight, and without any manner of
Reproach; and if it so happen that he have not receiv’d the degree of
Knighthood, the Sovereign is to bestow that Honour before he be allow’d
to take upon him the Execution of his deputative Power; for none but
Knights are capable of this Honour, or permitted to bear the _Ensigns_
of so great an _Order_. Hereupon the Lord _Willoughby_ of _Eresby_,
_Proctor_ for _Frederick_ II. King of _Denmark_, was Knighted by the
Sovereign, the Morning before he proceeded to take Possession of the
Stall.

There was one reason notwithstanding, why this particular was not
strictly stood upon, (though moved) in the case (and it’s the single
case) of _Henry Ramell_, Hereditary Lord of _Wosterwitz_ and
_Beckeskaw_, _Deputy_ for _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_, _Anno_ 3
_Jac._ I. for it being taken notice of that he was not a Knight,
certain Persons were sent from the Sovereign to signify his Pleasure,
that he should be advanc’d to the Honour of Knighthood before he took
upon him the _Ensigns_ of the _Order_ in his King’s behalf; to which he
made Answer, that he appeared here, not in his own, but in the Name of
the King of _Denmark_; and that such a degree of Honour was unusual in
his own Country, (being Born in _Pomerania_,) and therefore humbly
desired that he might be excus’d from the Honour; upon which the
Sovereign was pleas’d to dispence with him, and forthwith the said
_Deputy_ (but no Knight,) was admitted to take the Stall assign’d to
the said King his Principal.


                     _His Letters of Procuration._

§ 3. The Authority wherewith an elect Stranger invests his Proxy, which
ought to pass under his Hand and Seal, do generally contain these
Particulars.

First, He premiseth the Sovereign’s Election of him into the Order of
the _Garter_, and his receipt of the Habit and Ensigns thereof, then
takes notice or the Obligation the _Statutes_ of the Order put upon
him, for sending a Proxy to take Possession of his Stall, in regard the
Dignity whereunto he is advanc’d in his own Country, will not permit
him to repair Personally to _Windsor_; and being not only desirous that
the Election and Investiture should obtain its due effect, but to
fulfil, as far as in him lies, the Injunctions of the _Statutes_, in
what concerns the assuming of his Stall, and taking the Oath appointed;
he therefore Ordains, Authorises, and Deputes, a Person fitly
qualified, (named in the Deputation,) his sufficient _Proctor_, and
special _Deputy_, to appear at the Castle of _Windsor_ in his behalf
and in his Name, at the next Solemnity that should be held there, to
supply his room, and receive Possession of the Stall assign’d him,
according to the usual Form; and in all respects to perform those
Ceremonies and Things in his behalf due and accustom’d, or should
appear to belong any way to the Splendor or Ornament of the Order: As
also to take the accustomed Oath with those Qualifications, and in that
Form as had been (or should be) agreed on; and further, to fulfil all
other things which he should think necessary to be perform’d on this
Occasion, or whatsoever thing might require a more special Command,
than was contain’d in the Letters of Procuration; and as fully as the
Stranger should be obliged to, and would do, if he were there present
in his own Person. Lastly, there is usually added a Clause of
Ratification and Confirmation, of all such things as the _Proctor_
should say or do, in reference to the Solemnity of installation.


                     _Of the Proctor’s Reception._

§ 4. When the Sovereign is acquainted with the arrival of the Proxy,
and the occasion of his coming, he soon after gives him Audience; after
which, a Day for Installation is assign’d, and the Sovereign nominates
some of the _Knights-Companions_ his Commissioners, to perform the
Ceremonies.

The _Proctor_ heretofore has been receiv’d with very great State; Sir
_Balthasar Castilian_, sent hither from the Duke of _Urbin_, _Anno_ 22
_Hen._ VII. was met at the Sea-side by Sir _Thomas Brandon_, with a
goodly Company of his own Servants well Hors’d, who kept Company with
him, till they came near _Deptford_ in _Kent_; where, by the
Sovereign’s Command, he was met by Sir _Thomas Dokara_, and Sir _Thomas
Wriothesley_, _Garter_: The said Sir _Thomas Dokara_ had attending him
thirty of his Servants, all in new Liveries, well Hors’d, every
Gentleman bearing a Javelin in his Hand, and every Yeoman a Bow and a
Sheaf of Arrows, and so they convey’d him to his Lodging. The next Day
they conducted him to _London_, and by the way there met him divers
_Italians_, and _Paulus de Gygeles_, the Pope’s Vice Collector, to
whose House he was convey’d and lodg’d. The reception also of _James_
Lord _Rambovillet_, Proctor for the _French_ King, _Charles_ IX. was
very noble.


                  _The Preparations for Installation._

§ 5. The Preparations of the Installation of a Stranger by Proxy, are
the same as for the Proxy of a _Knight-Subject_, mention’d as before,
and the Form of the Commission for Installation is much the same; the
Preamble contains the Authority wherewith the Proxy is impower’d and is
penn’d with like Words.

The Letters of notice to the Commissioners.

The Warrants for removing of Stalls, and for the Strangers
Atchievements, are all to be obtain’d by the Chancellor of the Order,
under the Sovereign’s Sign Manual, to which the Signet of the Order is
to be affixt.

The Strangers Atchievements (as mention’d in the Warrant,) are to be
provided at the Sovereign’s Charge; namely, his _Helm_, _Crest_,
_Mantlings_, and _Sword_, together with a _Banner_ of his _Arms_ and
_Quarterings_; and these the Proctor is enjoin’d to bring along with
him to _Windsor_.

Sometimes a Warrant hath been directed to the Master of the _Wardrobe_,
to provide but some part of these Atchievements; and another Warrant to
the Lord Treasurer of _England_, to deliver _Garter_ Money to provide
the other part; in each of which, the particulars relating to either
are enumerated; for so were the Warrants drawn up for the Atchievements
of the _French_ King, _Henry_ II. At other times direction hath been to
the Master of the _Wardrobe_, to deliver to _Garter_ the whole, who
thereupon puts the Charge upon Account.

Sometimes particular Warrants have been directed to the Master of the
_Wardrobe_, to deliver several Parcels of the Materials, for the making
up these Atchievements; as were those Warrants, to deliver the
Sovereign’s Embroiderer, and to _Garter_, so much Velvet, Cloth of
Gold, _&c._ for making the great Banner, and other the Atchievements of
_Charles_ IX. and _Henry_ III. _French_ Kings.

It also appears that _Garter_ hath sometimes laid out the Money for
all, or part of the Atchievements, and then delivered his Bill of
disbursements into the _Wardrobe_; as is manifest from those Bills for
the Atchievements of _Frederick_ II. King of _Denmark_, in Count
Palatine of the _Rhine_, and the Duke of _Holstein_.

Besides the Atchievements, some other things used at the Solemnity are
commonly included in the foresaid Warrants; the _Mantle_ of the _Order_
is not prepared at the Sovereign’s Charge, for the Statutes of
Institution appoint the Proxy to bring one with him, not that the
Sovereign should provide it, having done that before, at the Legation
with the whole _Habit_; nor is it found in the Rolls or Books of the
Sovereign’s great _Wardrobe_, that any Account is made for providing a
second _Mantle_, when the Proxy of a Stranger came hither; which, had
the Sovereign been at such Charge, would not have been omitted.


                _The Proctor_’s _Cavalcade to_ Windsor.

§ 6. The Day appointed for the Installation drawing on, the Proxy was
heretofore accompanied from _London_ to _Windsor_, with the Sovereign’s
Lieutenant and his Assistants, (if the Feast of St. _George_ was then
also celebrated,) or otherwise the Sovereign’s Commissioners with a
great Retinue.

Among the rest, when the Deputy of the _French_ King, _Francis_ I. rode
to _Windsor_, _Anno_ 19 _Hen._ VIII. all the _Knights-Companions_ that
were in Commission for that Solemnity, assembled at the Lord _Sandy_’s
Place near St. _Paul_’s Church in _London_, whence they rode to the
_Deputy’s_ Lodging, and thence accompanied him with a gallant Equipage
to the Castle of _Windsor_, where Lodgings were prepared for him at the
_Dean’s_ House.

In like manner, _Anno_ 8 _Eliz._ the Earls of _Sussex_ and _Leicester_,
and Lord _Clinton_, (three of the four Commissioners appointed for the
Installation of the _French_ King, _Charles_ IX.) with other Lords and
Gentlemen, took their Horses at the Court Gate at _Westminster_, and
with a great Train rode to the Lodgings of the said King’s Proxy,
(being then at St. _Mary_’s _Spittle_ in _London_,) whence they went
through _Holbourn_ towards _Windsor_; the Earl of _Southampton_,
Viscount _Mountague_, Sir _Henry Lea_, and Sir _Edward Umpton_, met
them at _Langford_ near _Colbrook_, with their Hawks, and shew’d the
Proxy variety of sport, with which he being well pleased, they rode to
his Lodgings at the _Dean’s_ House at _Windsor_, the usual Place of
entertaining the Strangers Proxies.


                   _Supper after his Arrival there._

§ 7. The Evening of their arrival passeth with a sumptuous Supper, but
the principal Entertainment is reserv’d for the following Day’s Dinner.
At the Installation of the _French_ King, _Francis_ I. all the
Commissioners met together at the Marquiss of _Exeter_’s Lodgings, and
went to the _Dean’s_ House, where they were entertain’d by him at
Supper all at one Table; at another Table sat _Garter_, with certain of
the _Deputy’s_ chief Gentlemen, and some of the _Heralds_; and at a
third sat the rest of the _Heralds_, and other of the _Proxies_
Servants.

The Commissioners and other Noblemen, who accompanied the _Proctor_ of
_Charles_ IX. to _Windsor_, supped also with him at the _Dean’s_; He
himself sitting at the upper-end of the Table; then the Earls of
_Sussex_ and _Leicester_ by him, one against the other, next the Earl
of _Southampton_, and Viscount _Mountague_, then the Lord _Clinton_,
and Lord _Herbert_ of _Cardiff_, after them two Strangers of
distinction, then lower sat the Lord _Grey_, and other Strangers, and
last of all, at the lower end, opposite to the _Proctor_, sat _Monsieur
Dose_, _alias_ St. _Michael_, the _French Herald_. _Garter_,
_Black-Rod_, and divers Strangers, supped with the _Dean_, and in the
Parlour and Hall sat divers Pensioners, Gentlemen, and Strangers.


               _Of the Proceeding to the_ Chapter-House.

§ 8. What hath been before set down of the Proceeding to the
_Chapter-House_, at the personal Installation of a _Knight-Subject_,
will extend hither, both as to Order and Circumstances; yet this
general Rule is to be born in mind, that the Place of a Stranger
Prince’s Proctor here, is next after the Provincial King’s, (unless the
Proctor of a _Knight-Subject_ happen to intervene,) and before the
Junior _Knight-Companion_, (unless a _Knight-Subject_ pass then in the
Proceeding,) of which we have an Instance at the Installation of the
Dukes of _Brunswick_ and _Chevereux_, and the Earl of _Dorset_, by
their Proctors, but the Earls of _Salisbury_, _Carlisle_, and
_Holland_, with Viscount _Andover_ in Person, _Anno_ 1 _Car._ I. when
the Proceeding was ordered as followeth.


        1. Two Waiters of the Sovereign’s Hall, in their Livery
           Coats, bearing White Rods.
        2. Alms-Knights.
        3. Prebends of the College.
        4. Officers of Arms.
        5. Proctors to the absent elect Knights.
        6. Elect Knights in Person.
        7. Knights-Companions.
        8. Black-Rod.
        9. Register.
        10. Garter.
        11. Chancellor.
        12. Prelate.
        13. Sovereign’s Lieutenant.
        14. Courtiers and Gentlemen in the Rear.


Only in the single case of _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_, _Anno_ 3
_Jac._ I. (as an extraordinary Respect and Honour,) his Proxy went in
the Proceeding to the _Chapter-House_ next before the Sovereign’s
Lieutenant.

As we had a former Example, of a Proctor to a _Knight-Subject_, who in
this Proceeding past before the _Alms-Knights_, and Officers of Arms,
namely, Sir _Henry Sidney_, _Deputy_ to the Earl of _Warwick_, 5
_Eliz._ so here in the case of a _Stranger_, the Viscount _Hereford_,
Proxy to the Duke of _Holstein_, installed 3 _Eliz._ went in this
Proceeding to the _Chapter-House_, before the Officers of Arms: Which
Proceeding was ordered as follows.


         1. Gentlemen and Knights.
         2. The Proctor and Ambassador of _Holstein_ together.
         3. Officers of Arms.
         4. Register and Garter.
         5. Lord _Hastings_, and Lord _Paget_, Commissioners.


If the Proxy of a Stranger pass in the Proceeding, which the Sovereign,
his Lieutenant, or Commissioners, make to the _Chapter-House_, then for
the most part he gives his Attendance in the _Presence-Chamber_, or in
the Room whence the Lieutenant or Commissioners proceed, and there
joins himself thereto.

But sometimes the Commissioners, as an instance of singular Respect,
after their setting out, have taken the Proxies Lodging in their way,
and there receiv’d him into the Proceeding; so did Prince _Henry_, by
the Proctor of _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_; and the Commissioners
by the Proctor of the Duke of _Wirtembergh_, 2 _Jac._ I.

’Tis observed, that the Proxies of Strangers have not always gone in
the Proceeding, but sometimes staid at their Lodging, till the
Commissioners were ready to send for them to the _Chapter-House_. As at
the Installation of _Charles_ IX. King of _France_, 8 _Eliz._ the
Commissioners meeting, they, and the three inferior Officers of the
Order, robed themselves, and then went to the Proxies Lodging, and
having just conferr’d with him, took leave, and proceeded to the
_Chapter-House_, whence they sent out _Garter_ to the Proxy, with
invitation to come to them, who was presently conducted by _Garter_ to
the _Chapter-House_ Door, where the two Senior Commissioners receiv’d
him between them.

Sometimes the Proxies have past privately to the East-Isle of St.
_George_’s Chappel, and there rested, before the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_ went into the _Chapter-House_, or proceeded into
the Choir, without entering thereinto; for so did the Earl of
_Cleveland_, and the Marquiss of _Dorset_, Proxies to _Gustavus
Adolphus_, King of _Sweden_, and _Henry_, Prince of _Orange_, 4 _Car._
I. The like Method was observed by the Earl of _Dover_, Proxy to
_Charles_, Prince Palatine, 9 _Car._ I. and by Sir _George Cartaret_,
Proxy to _Christian_, Prince of _Denmark_, 15 _Car._ II. so also of the
Earls of _Carlisle_ and _Winchelsea_, Proxies to _Charles_, King of
_Sweden_, and _John George_, Prince Elector of _Saxony_, 23 _Car._ II.


                  _The Ceremonies perform’d therein._

§ 9. When the Proceeding hath arrived at the _Chapter-House_ Door, the
Sovereign, and _Knights-Companions_, or the Lieutenant, _&c._ with the
Officers of the _Order_ before them, enter to hold their Consultation;
the Stranger’s _Proxy_ being first requested to stay without, till his
Deputation, or Letters of Procuration are read, to the end they may
understand the effect thereof.

To this purpose we find it directed, by an ancient Hand, that where
any Knight is installed by his Deputy, he ought to stay without the
Vestry, or _Chapter-House_ Door, till he be introduced by two
_Knights-Companions_: So the Lord _Paget_, one of the Commissioners
for Installation of the Duke of _Savoy_, when the Proceeding was come
to the _Chapter-House_ Door, acquainted his _Proxy_ with this Custom
and Injunction, which he complied with.

The East-Isle, behind the High Altar, is the usual Place for _Proxies_
to stay, till they are called into the _Chapter_, as it is also for the
_Deputies_ of _Knights-Subjects_, where Chairs and Cushions are
prepared for this occasion.

The first thing done after the _Chapter_ is opened, is reading the
Commission for _Installation_, by the _Register_ of the _Order_, (but
if the Sovereign be present, no Commission issues,) and next, the
Letters of Procuration; this being the most usual and proper Place for
this Ceremony.

However, at the _Installation_ of the _French_ King, _Francis_ I. by a
very unusual compliance, the Commissioners went from the
_Chapter-House_, after they had called in and invested the Earl of
_Oxford_, with his _Surcoat_ and _Hood_, to the _Dean’s_ House, where
the _Proctor_ was lodg’d, and in a great Chamber there, shewed him the
Sovereign’s Commission, and in it the Authority for admitting him into
the Stall of his Lord and Master: Upon which the _Proctor_ presented
them with his Procuration, which impowered him to take Possession of
it, and to perform what Ceremonies related to it; which Instrument the
_Register_ read before them. This being done, they all proceeded to the
Chappel; where entering, they waved their return to the
_Chapter-House_, and passed directly into the _Choir_.

After some time of Consultation in the _Chapter-House_, the _Proxy_ is
sent for in thither by _Garter_, who conducts him to the
_Chapter-House_ Door, and his Reception there by the Commissioners is
after the same manner as is used to the _Knight elect_, or to his
_Proxy_: But whether he ought to enter the _Chapter-House_, or be
admitted any farther than the Door, or Porch thereof, and to pass
thence immediately into the _Choir_, hath been some Question; because
the Practice seems to have been sometimes one way, sometimes another.

All that we find to prohibit his Entrance therein, is an Expression in
the short Ceremonial of _Installation_ of Strangers by _Proxy_, entered
in the _Black-Book_; where it says—That the _Mantle_ is to be laid on
the _Proctor’s_ right Shoulder, in the Porch of the _Chapter-House_,
_because he is not to enter into it_.

And there are two Instances where the _Mantle_ was delivered to the
_Proctor_ at the _Chapter-House_ Door; from whence some may infer, that
the Practice of those Times was also agreeable to the aforesaid
direction; namely, that of the _Proctor_ of the _French_ King,
_Francis_ I. 19 _Hen._ VIII. where _Garter_ stood at the
_Chapter-House_ Door, with the _Mantle_, and as the Proceeding passed
by, presented it to the two Senior _Knights-Companions_, who placed it
upon the _Proctor’s_ right Arm; and so of the _Proctor_ of _Emanuel_,
Duke of _Savoy_, 1 and 2 _Phil._ and _Mar._ who entered not into the
_Chapter-House_, but had the _Mantle_ discussed at the Door.

But these Instances, if duly weighed, cannot properly, or with any
Advantage, be alledged to prove the Assertion; because the Affairs
relating to both, receiv’d dispatch in the _Proctors_ Lodging a little
before, and where the _Proctor_ himself was present, where the meeting
of the Commissioners and Proctor cannot be deemed less than a
_Chapter_, tho’ not held in the _Chapter-House_, from the Transactions
that passed there, _viz._ producing the Sovereign’s Warrant, and the
_Proctor’s_ Instrument of Deputation, which were both read before them
by the _Register_, and the _Proctor_ accordingly admitted, which being
finished, nothing relating to the present purpose required their
passing into the _Chapter-House_, or remained to be done till they came
into the _Choir_.

But the general Practice runs strong on the contrary side; for we find
that the _Proctor_ for _Charles_ IX. King of _France_, 8 _Eliz._ was
met at the _Chapter-House_ Door, by the Earls of _Sussex_ and
_Leicester_, who took him in thither between them, where, after the
_Register_ had read, as well the Sovereign’s Commission for
Installation, as his Letters of Procuration, and the Commissioners had
admitted him _Deputy_ for the said King, they all came forth, and laid
his Principal’s _Mantle_ on his right Arm and Shoulder, the Train
whereof was born by the Earl of _Southampton_, assisted by the Lord
_Herbert_ of _Cardiff_.

Again it is remarkable, 25 _Eliz._ that _Garter_ conducted the _Proxy_
of _Frederick_ II. King of _Denmark_, to the _Chapter-House_, and at
that Place the Earl of _Leicester_, and the Lord _Hunsdon_, received
and led him in: So also was _Christian_ IVth’s _Proxy_ led thither, by
the Earls of _Nottingham_ and _Dorset_. And in _Jac._ I. _Lodowick_,
Count _Nassau_, _Proctor_ to _Maurice_, Prince of _Orange_, was called
into the _Chapter-House_, and there left, while the Sovereign, and
_Knights-Companions_, proceeded into the _Choir_: Also in like manner
was Sir _George Cartaret_, _Proctor_ to _Christian_, Prince of
_Denmark_, 15 _Car._ II. and the _Proctors_ to the King of _Sweden_,
and Duke of _Saxony_, 23 _Car._ II.

Nor are these Instances, and the Practice in this latter case, really
derogatory to the Statutes, which, though they prohibit the _Proxies_
Entrance into the _Chapter-House_, yet do not extend to any thing
previous to the Installation, but what may happen after; for the
Article of the _Statutes_ having first directed the delivery of the
_Mantle_ to the _Proxy_, and next the assumption of his _Principal’s
Stall_, in these Words, _Dictus Procurator Installatus_, it immediately
subjoins, _that from thenceforth_, that is, from the time of
Installation, _he shall neither wear the_ Mantle, _nor enter into the_
Chapter, _nor have Voice there, by virtue of any Power granted him_.
All which are Prohibitions, plainly relating to future Examples, and
arising after the Ceremonies of Installation are past, and not at all
refering to what preceeds it.

And it seems the Law hath been thus understood, in regard the
greater prevalence of Practice hath generally attended it; for not
only the _Proxies_ of Strangers, as is observed, but generally
_Knights-Subjects_, have been called into the _Chapter-House_, and
there received the _Mantle_, before they proceeded into the _Choir_.

The Ceremony of delivering the _Mantle_ to the _Proctor_, is performed
by the Sovereign, his Deputy, or the Commissioners, _Garter_ presenting
it to them; and the manner of it was anciently, by putting it on the
_Proxies_ right Arm or Shoulder, in the Name of his Lord and Master,
there to hold it till the End of Divine Service.

But as there hath arisen some dispute, touching the _Proctor’s_ entry
into the _Chapter-House_ before Installation, so it hath happened in
this Point of receiving the _Mantle_, _viz._ whether in the _Chapter_,
or _Stall_ allotted their _Principal_, of which there are Examples.

That part of the Article in the _Statutes_ of _Institution_, relating
to this Point, runs thus:——_That the_ Mantle, _tempore Installationis
Procuratoris_, shall be laid on his Arm, _&c._ but whether this shall
be construed to that instant of time, when the _Proctor_ is brought to
the _Stall_ of his _Principal_, or to some greater Latitude, as during
the time of Installation, including the very first Action, or beginning
of the Ceremony, namely, the being called to the _Chapter-House_ Door,
and entrance into it, is the Question; because there are Instances in
both, but the latter is most warrantable by the _Statutes_ and general
Practice.

The Article in _Henry_ VIIIth’s _Statutes_ being much more clear in
describing and explaining the Ceremonies of _Installation_, than any of
the former; (the particulars of which in every Point seems to be
excellently regulated,) having mentioned the Sovereign, or his
_Deputies_, laying the _Mantle_ on the _Proxies_ Arm, it immediately
follows, as the very next thing to be performed in course of time;
_That afterwards he shall be led by two Knights, from the_
Chapter-House _Door to the_ Stall, _and there being, shall make his
Oath, and be installed_; it gives no Account of laying the _Mantle_ on
the Arm of the _Proctor_ at the instant of _Installation_ in the
_Choir_, that being directed to be done before. It is also recorded in
the _Black-Book_, where this Ceremony is more fully treated; _That_
Garter _shall take the_ Mantle _upon his Arms, and deliver it to both
the_ Knights-Commissioners, _and that they_ (according to the Tenour of
the Statutes,) _shall lay it on the_ Proctor’s _right Shoulder, in the
Porch of the_ Chapter-House.

Besides, the ancient usage of receiving the _Mantle_ in the
_Chapter-House_, or at the _Chapter-House_ Door, either before, or in
the Proceeding to the _Choir_, of which many instances may be given,
there are several modern instances where the _Mantle_ was born to the
_Choir_, (and sometimes the _Collar_ of the _Order_ with it,) not by
the _Proctor_, but by _Garter_, before him, and delivered in his
_Principal’s Stall_; as in the Proceeding of the _Proxy_ for the Duke
of _Wirtembergh_, _Anno_ 2 _Jac._ I. when, after he had taken the Oath,
and was led into the Duke’s _Stall_, (not before) was the Robe laid on
his Arm; and so was it done in many more _Installations_; which manner
hath so far prevail’d as to be the continu’d Practice, _Garter_
carrying the _Mantle_ on a Cushion before the _Proctors_ into the
_Choir_, and laying it (after they have taken their Oaths,) on their
Arms in such manner, that the _Cross_ of St. _George_ may be
conspicuous.


                   _Of the Proceeding to the Choir._

§ 10. Concerning the _Proxies_ Proceeding into the _Choir_, King
_Henry_ VIIIth’s _Statutes_ direct: _That he shall be accompanied and
led by_ two Knights-Companions _of the_ Order, _from the Door of the_
Chapter-House, _to the_ Stall _assigned to his Principal_; agreeable to
which, is that Passage in the _Black-Book_; _That as soon as the two
Knights have placed the Mantle on his Arm, they shall take him between
them, and conduct him to the_ Stall _of his Lord_; and thus assisted
have all _Proxies_ proceeded to the _Choir_.

Since the Custom of receiving the _Collar_ in the _Chapter-House_ was
laid aside, the Sovereign, (or his Lieutenant,) with the
_Knights-Companions_, (so soon as the _Mantle_ is delivered the
_Proctor_, or (as of late) that he hath been admitted according to the
purport of his Deputation,) proceed to the _Choir_, leaving the _Proxy_
behind them in the _Chapter-House_, and after they have taken their
_Stalls_, the Sovereign directs two of the _Knights-Companions_ to
descend; who taking the _Alms-Knights_, _Officers of Arms_, and the
three inferior Officers of the _Order_ before them, pass to the
_Chapter-House_, and bring thence the _Proxy_ to his _Installation_. In
this Proceeding the _Proxy_ goes Bare-headed, as did the Earl of
_Dover_, _Proctor_ to _Charles_, Prince Palatine of the _Rhine_, and
Sir _George Cartaret_, _Proctor_ to the Prince of _Denmark_, _Anno_ 15
_Car._ II.


                   _The Ceremonies of Installation._

§ 11. When the Proceeding hath entred the _Choir_, and paid the
accustomed Reverences, both towards the _Altar_ and the Sovereign’s
_Stall_, and the _Alms-Knights_, _Officers of Arms_ and of the _Order_,
taken their usual Stations; the two Commissioners (_Knights-Assistants_
or _Knights-Companions_,) and _Proctor_ make their Reverences together,
and then they conduct him into the lower _Stalls_ directly before the
_Stall_ appointed for his _Principal_, the foresaid _Officers_ of the
_Order_ standing below in the _Choir_: If there be more than two
Commissioners, then the two Senior conduct him as before, while the
rest of the Commissioners take their Station below in the _Choir_,
before their proper _Stalls_, and there stay till the _Installation_ be
finish’d, and the like do the _Lieutenants-Assistants_, except the two
Senior that are imployed in the Ceremony.

The _Proxy_ thus introduced into the lower _Stalls_, stands there while
the _Register_ pronounceth the Oath of the _Order_ to him, which he
repeats distinctly, laying his Hand on the _New Testament_, and
afterwards kisseth the Book.

The ancient Oath appointed by the _Statutes_ of Institution is short,
and without limitation in all Points, the same with that a
_Knight-Companion_ takes at his Personal _Installation_, _viz._
_Faithfully to observe, to the utmost of his Power, the_ Statutes _of
the_ Order; but afterwards the Sovereign’s and Fellows of those other
_Orders_ of _Knighthood_, (as the _Golden Fleece_, _Monsieur St.
Michael_, _&c._) before their admission into the _Order_ of the
_Garter_, sued for, and obtained the allowance of some relative
exceptions or proviso’s to be added to the aforesaid Oath; which
usually were such as stood with the interest of their Religion, their
great State or Dignity, or precedent obligation to the _Order_ they had
before accepted.

In the _Black-Book_ is a Precedent of the Oath to be taken by an
Emperor; whereby he is obliged to promise on his Royal Word, and give
his Faith on his Honour and the Holy Evangelists, _That he will
faithfully and truly, to the utmost of his Power, observe the Statutes
in every Branch and Article thereof, at least so far as they can or
ought to be observed by him, and so far as they shall not be contrary
or derogatory to those whereunto he hath before given his Name and
Sworn, and saving all other conditions agreed on_. There are besides
this, other Precedents in the Annals of the Form of the Oath from the
_Proctor_ of an Emperor or King, and of every other inferior Degree,
wherein are several exceptions before agreed on; and when _Philip_,
King of _Castile_ and _Leon_, (Sovereign of the _Order_ of the _Golden
Fleece_,) was Personally installed at _Windsor_, _Anno_ 22 _Hen._ VII.
and took the Oath without Limitation, yet he soon after obtain’d the
Sovereign’s Dispensation, that the use of the _Collar_ and other
_Ensigns_ of the _Order_ might be left to his pleasure, and that he
might not be obliged to be present at future _Chapters_.

Other Exceptions have been admitted, but were obtained with great
difficulty and much debate, lest the Dignity and Reputation of the
_Order_ should (instead of being kept up) be lessen’d, the forbearance
of some Circumstances that hath been yeilded to, having sometimes been
brought into Precedent, to the prejudice of the _Order_.

The exceptions that were allow’d the Arch-Duke of _Austria_, when he
took the Oath at his Investiture at _Noremberg_, _Anno_ 15 _Hen._ VIII.
were as follow.

_Not to wear the_ Garter _and_ Collar _but at some certain times in the
Year, at his own pleasure._

_That if he were not in Place convenient to go to hear Mass on St._
George’_s Day, he should cause a Priest to say it in his presence._

_Not to be obliged, if busied in weighty Affairs, to wear the_ Garter,
Collar, _or whole_ Habit _of the_ Order, _on St._ George’_s Day, longer
than during divine Service; nevertheless he promised, if he could not
than wear it for a whole Day together, he would willingly wear it on
some other solemn Day within the compass of the Year._

Of another nature were the exceptions which _Francis_ I. King of
_France_, procured to be admitted into the Oath taken by his _Proctor_,
_Anno_ 19 _Hen._ VIII. _viz._ _To observe the Statutes of the_ Order
_of the_ Garter _so far as they were consistent with, and not contrary
or prejudicial to the Statutes of the_ Order _of St._ Michael, _and
other_ Orders _which his Principal had before taken of other Princes._

Such like exceptions have been generally allowed to Kings and Sovereign
Princes; but as to the _Proxies_ of such Strangers, not Sovereign
Princes, but Subjects, the Form of their Oath is usually framed (by the
indulgence of the Sovereign,) with just limitations, not only to their
obligation of the Statutes of any other _Order_ they had accepted, or
any Oath formerly taken, but sometimes to the Fidelity and Allegiance
which they owe their Sovereign Lord and Prince.

After the Oath hath been administred to a Stranger’s _Proxy_,
(with such or the like exceptions before set down,) the two
_Knights-Commissioners_ pass up with him into the higher Row of
_Stalls_, and so to that assign’d to his Principal, where being
arrived, they take the _Mantle_ from _Garter_, and lay it upon
the _Proctor’s_ left Arm, with the Escutcheon of St. _George_
uppermost, according to an _Order_ in a _Chapter_ held, _Anno_ 23
_Car._ II. which was to be a standing Rule for the future, and is
now observ’d.

In the Act and Ceremony of _Installation_, the _Commissioners_ who
first conducted the _Proxy_ into the _Choir_, jointly embrace him; then
the _Proxy_ makes his double Reverence, and lastly the _Commissioners_,
according to the Custom of _Installations_, set him down in his
Principal’s _Stall_, where he hath used to remain during Divine
Service; but by the aforesaid _Order_ in _Chapter_, _Anno_ 23 _Car._
II. the _Proxies_ are prohibited sitting in their _Stalls_, but
directed to stand before them uncovered, with their _Mantles_ on their
right Arms, until Divine Service be ended.

The two _Knights_ (between whom the _Proxy_ proceeded to
_Installation_,) descend into the _Choir_, and stand before their own
_Stalls_, and after a while, first the Senior _Commissioners_, and then
the other, ascend into them with usual Reverences, and then Divine
Service begins.


                       _The Proctor’s Offering._

§ 12. The _Proctor_ having receiv’d Possession of his Principal’s
_Stall_, stays in the _Choir_, and performs the following Ceremonies,
the chief of which is the _Offering_ of _Gold_ and _Silver_, according
to the Degree and Seniority of his Principal’s _Stall_, in case the
_Installation_ be in the Morning; but if it be celebrated when St.
_George_’s Feast is held by the Sovereign’s _Lieutenant_, the _Proxy_
ought not to Offer till the _Lieutenant_ hath first Offered for the
Sovereign; and the _Lieutenant_ also Offereth for himself before the
_Proctor_, if his Stall be higher than the Stranger’s, for whom the
_Proctor_ is installed.

The _Proctor_ in Offering doth it with all the Ceremony as if his Lord
were present; when the _Knights-Companions_ descend from their Stalls,
(which Ceremony begins with the Junior _Knight_,) he also descends in
his turn, and placeth himself below in the _Choir_ before the Stall of
his _Principal_, and if he have an opposite _Knight-Companion_, he
joins himself to him, and proceeds towards the _Altar_ to the Offering,
with the Officers of Arms before him; but if no _Knight-Companion_ be
opposite, he then proceeds alone, having his Train born, and a
_Knight-Companion_, or some other great Personage, suitable to his
Degree, attending on his left Hand, to give him the Offering, which he
Offers kneeling on a Cushion, and after him the rest of the
_Knights-Companions_ present Offer, every one according to the
Seniority of their Stalls.

After the Offering, the _Proctor_ taking his way by the East-end of the
Stalls, returns back to the Stall of his _Principal_, and Divine
Service being finish’d, and like Honour in all respects shewed to his
_Proxy_ as if his Principal had been present, he ought to remain in his
Master’s Stall till his next Junior _Knight_ hath left his Stall, and
then descend after him, and stand below before his Stall, till his turn
come to join himself again to the Proceeding, and so to pass out of the
_Choir_.

Sometimes the _Proctor_ hath been receiv’d at his coming down from his
Lord’s Stall by the two _Knights-Commissioners_ who installed him, as
were the _Proctors_ of _Frederick_ II. King of _Denmark_, and _John_,
Count Palatine of the _Rhine_, between whom they also proceeded to the
_Chapter-House_ Door, in the same manner they were conducted into the
_Choir_; but notwithstanding this, the _Proctor_ ought rather to take
in his return the Place of his Principal, (as he did at the Offering,
and which is indeed his right,) and so the _Proctor_ of _Francis_ I.
went behind alone in his Principal’s place, and followed the
_Knights-Commissioners_ from the _Choir_ to the place where he lodged;
and this Method is since followed.


                             _The Dinner._

§ 13. When the _Installation_ hath past in the Morning, there hath
usually been prepared a great Dinner at the Sovereign’s Charge; we need
here only mention what is different in this particular from the
Personal _Installation_ of a _Knight-Companion_.

The _Proxy_ washes alone, sits at the chief Place of the Table alone,
and is serv’d alone, but the other _Knights-Companions_ sit at the end
of the Table; but if the Sovereign’s Lieutenant be present, the
_Proctor_ dines at the same Table with him, and then a little before
the second Course is brought in, the Sovereign’s Stile is proclaimed
with the usual Ceremony, in _Latin_, _French_, and _English_; but
otherwise only the Stile of the new installed Prince, and but once. The
Stile and Titles of _Christian_ IV. King of _Denmark_, were proclaimed
in _Latin_; and of _Maurice_, Prince of _Orange_, in _French_.

Dinner being ended, all rise in Order and Wash; first, the _Proxy_
alone, and after him the _Knights-Commissioners_; and accompanying the
_Proctor_ to his Chamber, where leaving him, they retire to their own
Lodgings, and there put off their Habits.

When the Solemnity of _Installation_ is over, the _Proctor_ is to take
care, that _Garter_ forthwith set up the Atchievements of his
_Principal_ over his _Stall_, and fix the Plate of his Arms on the back
thereof; in Memorial of the Ceremony of Inauguration; to which end also
Medals have frequently been struck, to perpetuate the Honour so
received.




                               CAP. XVII.

        _The Duties and Fees payable by the_ Knights-Companions
                        _at their Installations_.


           _Touching the Fees due to the College of_ Windsor.

§ 1. Such was the Piety and Bounty of our Ancestors, that they thought
no Work well perform’d, without being attended with some charitable
Donation, especially if it had relation to the Church, whereto they
generally bore a venerable Esteem. Hence was it at the _Installation_
of the _Order_ ordain’d: _That every_ Knight-Companion _should, at his
entrance, bestow a certain Sum of Money, according to his Quality and
Degree_. That is to say,


                                           _l._ _s._ _d._
              The Sovereign of the _Order_   26   13   04
              A Stranger King                20   00   00
              The Prince of _Wales_          13   06   08
              Every Duke                     10   00   00
              Every Earl                     06   13   04
              Every Baron                    05   00   00
              Every Knight-Batchelor         03   06   08


These Summs were appointed _towards the Relief of the Cannons of_
Windsor, _the Alms-Knights, and augmentation of the Alms-Deeds, there
appointed perpetually to be done_. To the end, _That every one entring
into this Military_ Order, _might thereby more worthily obtain the
Name, Title, and Privilege, of one of the Founders of the_ Order; _it
being supposed a worthy and just thing, that whosoever obtained this
Privilege, should add some small increment to this Foundation_.

Not long after establishing the Statutes, the Titles of _Marquiss_ and
_Viscount_ becoming special Dignities, it was Decreed, _Anno_ 22 _Hen._
VI. that a _Marquiss_ should contribute 8 _l._ 6 _s._ 8 _d._ and a
_Viscount_ 5 _l._ 16 _s._ 8 _d._ which was confirmed by King _Henry_
VIIIth’s Statutes.

And though in all the Bodies of the Statutes, the Sovereign of the
_Order_ is charg’d with Payment of Fees to the College, yet is it to be
understood only of those Sovereigns, who were not (before the
assumption of their Stall,) elected into this _Order_.

Upon a Decree, _Anno_ 22 _Car._ II. the _Installation_ Fee to all the
Officers of the _Order_ were settled: Those made payable to the _Dean_
and _Canons_ are,


                                        _l._ _s._ _d._
                  A Stranger King         20   00   00
                  A Stranger Prince       10   00   00
                  The Prince of _Wales_   20   00   00
                  A Duke                  10   00   00
                  A Marquiss              08   06   08
                  An Earl                 06   13   04
                  A Viscount              05   16   08
                  A Baron                 05   00   00
                  A Knight-Batchelor      03   06   08


These Fees ought to be paid at the time of the Knight’s _Installation_,
by the Hands of some one of their Servants, so soon as the Ceremonies
are ended; the Statutes expressly prohibiting the setting up of their
Atchievements till Payment be made.

The _Alms-Knights_, by Queen _Elizabeth_’s Establishment, receiv’d
_Installation_ Fees apart from those paid to the College, which by the
aforesaid Establishment of Fees, _Anno_ 22 _Car._ II. are made equal to
those payable to the _Dean_ and _Canons_; and by the said Decree, the
_Choir_ of _Windsor_, under which not only the _Vicars_, but the
_Vergers_, _Choristers_, and _Bell-Ringers_, are comprehended, receive
the following Fees.


                                       _l._ _s._ _d._

                   A Stranger King       16   00   00
                   A Stranger Prince     08   10   00
                   A Prince of _Wales_   16   00   00
                   A Duke                08   10   00
                   A Marquiss            06   15   00
                   An Earl               05   10   00
                   A Viscount            04   00   00
                   A Baron               04   00   00
                   A Knight-Batchelor    03   00   00


_Fees due to the_ Register, Garter, Black-Rod, _and_ Officers _of_ Arms.

§ 11. In the Rank of those Officers to whom _Installation_ fees are
due, stands first the _Register_, who, as appears by the _Black-Book_,
is to have of every _Knight-Companion_ 13 _s._ 4 _d._ and a Robe.

But there being a concealment of this Fee, it was represented to King
_Charles_ I. who ordered the _Register_ to be paid in Lieu of the Robe,
as follows;


                                    _s._ _d._       _l._ _s._ _d._
 _Imprim._ _For a_  {Knight-Batchelor  13   04 }     { 28   00   00
                    {Baron             13   04 }     { 30   00   00
                    {Viscount          13   04 }     { 32   00   00
 _Item._ _For a_    {Earl              13   04 } and { 34   00   00
                    {Marquiss          13   04 }     { 36   00   00
                    {Duke              13   04 }     { 40   00   00
                    {Prince            13   04 }     { 38   00   00


The same were since settled by the Establishment of _Installation_
Fees, _Anno_ 22 _Car._ II. when it was added, that the Prince of
_Wales_, and a Stranger King, should pay 40 _l._ and a Stranger Prince
38 _l._ 13 _s._ 4 _d._

Next, the _Register_ and _Garter_ claim both Droits and Fees, for their
Service and Attendance, having a greater share of Business than any
other Officer of the _Order_. As to the first of these, it was ordained
by the Constitutions of his Office; _That as often as any Knight should
happen to be installed, he might challenge for himself the Garments
wore by him, immediately before his Investiture with the Surcoat of
the_ Order. And the constant Practice hath interpreted this to be the
Knight’s upper Garment, anciently a short Gown, of later times a Cloak,
but now a Coat; which he puts off in the _Chapter-House_ when the
_Investiture_ begins.

By the Establishment of _Installation_ Fees, _Anno_ 22 _Car._ II. the
composition set upon each _Knight-Companion_ for his upper Garment, was
thus rated.


                                       _l._ _s._ _d._
                   A Prince of _Wales_   60   00   00
                   A Duke                55   00   00
                   A Marquiss            50   00   00
                   An Earl               45   00   00
                   A Viscount            40   00   00
                   A Baron               35   00   00
                   A Knight-Batchelor    30   00   00


Besides this Droit or Composition, there hath in all times been paid to
_Garter_ by every _Knight-Companion_, a Fee for his _Installation_,
which was likewise brought to the following certainty by the said
Establishment.


                                       _l._ _s._ _d._
                   A Stranger King       30   00   00
                   A Stranger Prince     20   00   00
                   A Prince of _Wales_   40   00   00
                   A Duke                35   00   00
                   A Marquiss            30   00   00
                   An Earl               25   00   00
                   A Viscount            20   00   00
                   A Baron               25   00   00
                   A Knight-Batchelor    10   00   00


The Fee due to the _Black-Rod_ by the said Establishment, is, from


                                       _l._ _s._ _d._
                   A Stranger King       20   00   00
                   A Stranger Prince     20   00   00
                   A Prince of _Wales_   40   00   00
                   A Duke                20   00   00
                   A Marquiss            18   00   00
                   An Earl               16   00   00
                   A Viscount            14   00   00
                   A Baron               12   00   00
                   A Knight-Batchelor    10   00   00


The _Officers_ of _Arms_, by the said Establishment, have the same Fees
as are allowed the _Black-Rod_; only in the Fee of a Stranger King,
they have an addition of ten Pounds more.


         _Fees belonging to other of the Sovereign’s Servants._

§ 3. In the Lists of _Installation_ Fees of former times, some Officers
were set down, who gave their attendance, with the several Sums they
receiv’d, some that were then accounted Fees, and others Benevolences;
all which nevertheless were admitted into the List of _Installation_
Fees, 22 _Car._ II. and though not entered into the _Register_ of the
_Order_, yet are to be given in under the Hand of _Garter_, with the
other Fees payable at _Installations_, and to be paid by every Knight
to all Persons concern’d respectively, according to ancient Custom,
_viz._


                       Prince.     Duke.      Marquiss.    Earl.

 To the Wardrobe    |  06 00 00 |  03 00 00 |  02 10 00 |  02 00 0
 The Trumpets       |  12 00 00 |  06 00 00 |  05 00 00 |  04 00 0
 The Serj. Trumpet  |  02 00 00 |  01 00 00 |  01 00 00 |  01 00 0
 The Musicians      |  16 00 00 |  08 00 00 |  01 00 00 |  06 00 0
 Drums and Fifes    |  04 00 00 |  02 00 00 |  01 15 00 |  01 10 0
 Knight-Harbinger   |  03 06 08 |  03 06 08 |  03 06 08 |  03 06 8
 The Porters        |  06 00 00 |  03 00 00 |  02 10 00 |  02 00 0
 Master Cook        |  03 00 00 |  01 10 00 |  01 05 00 |  01 00 0
 Serjeant Porter    |  06 00 00 |  03 00 00 |  02 00 00 |  01 00 0
 To the Vestry      |  02 00 00 |  01 00 00 |  01 00 00 |  01 00 0
 Yeomen Harbingers  |  06 00 00 |  03 00 00 |  02 10 00 |  02 00 0
 Ushers of the Hall |  02 00 00 |  01 10 00 |  01 05 00 |  01 00 0
 Grooms of Chamb.   |  03 00 00 |  01 10 00 |  01 05 00 |  01 00 0
 Yeomen Ushers      |  06 13 04 |  03 06 08 |  03 00 00 |  02 10 0
 Quarter Waiters    |  08 16 00 |  04 08 04 |  03 16 08 |  03 06 8
 Sewers             |  08 00 00 |  04 08 04 |  03 16 08 |  03 06 8
 Buttery            |  03 00 00 |  01 10 00 |  01 05 00 |  01 00 0
 Pantry             |  03 00 00 |  01 10 00 |  01 05 00 |  01 00 0
 Cellar             |  03 00 00 |  01 10 00 |  01 05 00 |  01 00 0


                        Viscount.    Baron.     Kt-Batch.
 To the Wardrobe     |  01 15 00  | 01 10 00  | 01 05 00
 The Trumpets        |  03 00 00  | 02 10 00  | 02 00 00
 The Serj. Trumpeter |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 The Musicians       |  05 00 00  | 04 00 00  | 03 00 00
 Drums and Fifes     |  01 05 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Knight-Harbinger    |  03 06 08  | 03 06 08  | 03 06 08
 The Porters         |  02 00 00  | 01 10 00  | 01 00 00
 Master Cook         |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Serjeant Porter     |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 The Vestry          |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Yeomen Harbingers   |  02 00 00  | 01 10 00  | 01 00 00
 Ushers of the Hall  |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Grooms of Chamber   |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Yeomen Ushers       |  02 00 00  | 01 10 00  | 01 00 00
 Quarter Waiters     |  03 00 00  | 02 10 00  | 02 00 00
 Sewers              |  03 00 00  | 02 10 00  | 02 00 00
 Buttery             |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Pantry              |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00
 Cellar              |  01 00 00  | 01 00 00  | 01 00 00


                     _Fees payable for Strangers._

§ 4. That Strangers should be liable to the demand of Fees, was thought
unreasonable; therefore by the _Statutes_ of _Institution_, the
Sovereign is obliged to pay them; the first Example whereof that we
meet with, is an Order, 1 _Hen._ VI. which appointed: _That the usual
Fees, due for the_ Installation _of the King of_ Denmark, _should be
discharg’d by the Sovereign, as the_ Statute _enjoin’d_.

To this purpose Privy-Seals were issued to the Lord Treasurer for the
time being, to pay the Fees to the _Register_ of the _Order_ out of the
_Exchequer_, which was the constant Custom, till King _Charles_ I. in
the 13th Year of his Reign, settled an Annual Pension of 1200 _l._ upon
the _Order_; and by a Commission in the said Year, impower’d the
Chancellor of the _Order_, and his Successors, to pay out of the same,
not only the ordinary, but also extraordinary Charges of the _Order_;
wherein the Fees for _Installation_ of Strangers are included.

Notwithstanding the Sovereign (as we have shown) discharg’d the
_Installation_ Fees due from Strangers, yet they or their _Proctors_
for them, did always bestow particular Rewards on the _College_, the
Officers of the _Order_ and of _Arms_, the _Alms-Knights_, and some
others who attended the Solemnity, and in particular _Garter_ had
anciently bestowed on him a rich Gown, to wear at the time of
_Installation_, but of late he has been presented with some other thing
of considerable Value. They also were liberal to the Officers of
_Arms_, as appears by several _Largesses_ given to them by their
_Proctors_, and in general to the greatest part of those that gave
their Attendance.




                              CAP. XVIII.

                   _Of the Grand Feast of the_ Order.


        _The Grand Feast appointed to be celebrated Annually on
                          St._ George’_s_ Day.

§ 1. By the _Statutes_ of _Institution_, it’s ordain’d, That a solemn
Festival should be Annually celebrated on the 23d Day of _April_, or
St. _George_’s _Day_, in Honour of the Patron of the _Order_, as is
observed in other military Orders, erected since this of the _Garter_,
to which this seems to give Rules of holding their Festivals on the
Anniversary of their Patrons. Thus _Philip_, Duke of _Burgundy_, on his
erecting the _Order_ of the _Golden Fleece_, taking St. _Andrew_ for
its Patron, appointed the Festival on St. _Andrew_’s _Day_. _Lewis_ XI.
King of _France_, appointed _Michaelmas Day_ for holding the Feast of
the _Order_ of St. _Michael_. And so the Festival of the Duke of
_Savoy_’s _Order_ of the _Annunciade_, on _Lady Day_. The Duke of
_Bourbon_’s _Order_ of the Knights of our _Lady_, on the Conception of
our _Lady_ (8th _December_;) and other instances might likewise be
given if it were necessary.


         _The Anniversary of St._ George _fixed by the Church,
                     to the twenty third of_ April.

§ 2. That the 23d of _April_ was the Day whereon St. _George_ suffered
Martyrdom by Beheading, appears from the _Greek Hexamiter_ before his
Commemoration; which was the Day observed both by the _Greek_ and
_Latin Church_; as also by our Predecessors, the _Saxons_.


               _St._ George’_s_ Day _made_ Festum duplex.

§ 3. After the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ had encreased the
Honour of their Patron’s Festival, our Church began to take greater
notice of it, being now also esteemed among us as the Patron of the
Nation; and therefore they bestowed an addition of Honour upon it, by
making it _Festum duplex, ad Modum Majorum Duplicis_. 3 _Hen._ V.


_The Place for celebrating the Grand Feast, assigned to_ Windsor-Castle.

§ 4. The Founder of this most Noble _Order_ having fixed on this Day,
for performing its Solemnities, he made Choice of that of his Nativity,
the _Castle_ of _Windsor_, which for a long time after was inviolably
observed there, either upon the very Day, or some other appointed by
Prorogation, not long after: For which way of Prorogation, allowance
was given by the _Statutes_ of the _Order_, and of which the
_Registers_ are full of instances.


         _St._ George’_s_ Day _kept apart from the Grand Feast,
                         and how then observed_.

§ 5. How this Noble _Order_ flourished from its Foundation to the time
of _Henry_ V. no Account can be given, since the Annals thereof are
wanting to his Reign; but then it appears to have been in considerable
Splendor; but the Civil Wars toward the end of _Henry_ VIth’s Reign,
eclipsed it for a while. Under King _Edward_ IV. when things were a
little settled, it seem’d to recover; and in King _Henry_ VIIIth’s
time, was at a greater heighth than ever. However, though the several
Branches of the _Order_ receiv’d some Augmentation from the influence
of this Monarch, yet the Grand Feast began to decline, by a removal of
the observation of St. _George_’s _Day_ from _Windsor_, and a
prorogatory Celebration of the Grand Feast to other times.

The Article of the _Statutes_, causing this great alteration from the
original design of the first Institution, gives the Sovereign Power to
prorogue the Grand Feast at his Pleasure; but then ’tis evident from
the same Statute, that St. _George_’s _Day_ was nevertheless ordained
to be duly observed by it self, in what Place soever the Sovereign (if
within the Realm) should then reside; _Windsor_ hereby being not
excluded.

It farther implies, the sacred _Rites_ and _Offices_ to be performed,
with other Matters concerning the _Order_; for besides the particulars
therein enumerated, this general Clause is observable: That what other
urgent Affair soever, relating to the _Order_, should offer it self to
be performed, the same might be treated of, and receive dispatches, in
the _Chapter_ held where the Sovereign then should be, as fully as if
he were at _Windsor Castle_.

So that henceforward, all things began to be ordered, both on the Eve
the Day of St. _George_, and the Morrow after, with as great State; all
Affairs as legally dispatched, and all Ceremonies as magnificently
performed, except that of offering up of Atchievements, which is
peculiar to the Chappel of St. _George_ at _Windsor_ only, as could be
observed at the _Grand Festival_ it self.

And how, by Virtue of this Article, and with what Ceremonies St.
_George_’s _Day_ was held, when the Grand Feast was prorogued, is
evident from a full and ample Precedent, 22 _Hen._ VIII. now remaining
in the _Office_ of _Arms_.

For though the Sovereign with 13 _Knights-Companions_ were at _Windsor_
that Year, upon the 22, 23 and 24 of _April_, yet at that time they
observed only the Feast Day of St. _George_, with the Eve and Morrow
after, but deferred, by Order in _Chapter_, the Celebration of the
Grand Feast, to the 8th of _May_ ensuing.


            _The Grand Feast neglected by King_ Edward _VI._

§ 6. From the Accession of this Prince, the Sovereignty of this _Order_
became more neglected, so that during his Reign, no Anniversary of St.
_George_ was kept at _Windsor_, by a _Grand Festival_.

This is supposed to be owing to the common Calamity of that Age,
wherein most Ceremonies, solemn or splendid, especially such as related
to Divine Services, came under the denomination of being either
Superstitious or Idolatrous. Insomuch, that at a _Chapter_ held at
_Greenwich_, 2 _Edw._ VI. an Abolition being intended for such
Ceremonies as were not consonant to the King’s Injunctions, lately
prescribed, it was then decreed, that then, and for ever from
thenceforth, at the Feast of this most Noble _Order_, no other
Ceremonies should be observed than such as were appointed by his
Majesties Letter.

_That no Procession should be made with going about the Church, or
Church-yard, but the King’s Majesty’s Procession, lately set forth in_
English _to be used. His Majesty and other_ Knights-Companions _sitting
in their Stalls, at the Entry, such Reverences to be made to the King’s
Majesty only as was heretofore. The Offering to be in the Box for the
Poor, without any other Reverence, or kissing any Paten, or other
thing; but only at the return, due Reverence to the King, as was used
before. The Mass of_ Requiem _to be left undone, but yet, both on St._
George’_s_ Day, _and for next Day, a Mass to be Sung with great
Reverence; in which, immediately after the Words of Consecration is
said, the Priest shall say the_ Pater Noster, _and so turn and
Communicate to all, or so many of the_ Order, _or other, after they
have done, as shall be disposed to receive the Communion, according to
the_ Order _prescribed by his Majesty’s Book of Communion, and without
any other Rite or Ceremony after the said Communion to be used; except
some godly Psalm or Hymn to be Sung in_ English, _and so to end the
said Service. All_ Chapters, _and other Rites concerning the_ Order,
_not being contrary to these, to remain as they have been used._

This Decree seemed to mean nothing less than a Prohibition to the
holding the Grand Feast at _Windsor_, at least the neglect of its
Celebration there, whilst King _Edw._ VI. lived: And though toward the
End of his Reign, some care was taken for a Permission to hold the said
Feast, either on St. _George_’s _Day_, or some other appointed by
Prorogation; yet it was without any regard to the ancient and usual
Place; for when the Act passed, commanding the Days therein mentioned
to be kept Holy, and no other, whereby this was involved among many
other Saints Days then prohibited to be kept, as not being found among
the Feasts then Establish’d; it was considered, that a Proviso and
Allowance should be entered in the aforesaid Act, for the Celebration
of this Feast, particularly by the _Knights-Companions_; which Act,
though it suffered a Repeal by Queen _Mary_, yet stands in force at
this Day, being revived by King _James_ I. his repealing that _Statute_
of 1 _Mar._ _Cap._ 2.


              _Removed from_ Windsor _by Queen_ Elizabeth.

§ 7. But the most fatal Blow given to the growing Honour of the Castle
of _Windsor_, was a Decree in _Chapter_ held 9 _Eliz._ with the consent
of the _Knights-Companions_ then present, _viz._

_That if on the Vigil and Day of St._ George, _the Feast was not held
at_ Windsor, _according to the usual Custom, it should nevertheless be
sufficient, if the Observation thereof were kept at the same Place
where the Sovereign should then happen to be, where also the rest of
the_ Knights-Companions _were obliged to be present, no less than if
the Feast had been held at_ Windsor.

And so severe was the latter part of this Decree against the
flourishing condition of that Place, that it commanded also,

_That no other Solemnity, under the notion of St._ George’_s Feast,
should thenceforth be celebrated at_ Windsor, _except upon occasion of
the_ Installation _of some illustrious Person, and then also, not
without express leave of the Sovereign._

And to say truth, this _Statute_ was but too strictly observed during
her Reign; for we meet but with one Feast of St. _George_ held there,
till 1 _Jac._ I. (unless we mistake the Feasts of _Installation_ for
those of St. _George_,) but then the Sovereign, who was yet in
_Scotland_, lent his Commission, dated 5 _April_, to the Earl of
_Nottingham_, his _Lieutenant_, to prorogue the Festival to the 3d
_July_ following, and after constituted him to hold the Feast, which
was performed the 2, 3 and 4 Days of the said Month, with all Pomp and
Ceremony. The King himself, being then at _Windsor_, was prevented from
being present by some occasion not mentioned.

Thus, after a long Interval, the Honour of the Feast was restored,
which had this effect, toward the End of King _James_ I. Reign, and
that of his Son and Successor, King _Charles_ I. that it begat a
Re-union of the Feast and Place, whereby the Castle of _Windsor_,
famous for the _Institution_ of this most Noble _Order_, retrieved its
ancient Honour, of having its Solemnities celebrated there.


                  _Of Prorogation of the Grand Feast._

§ 8. Having thus noted, that from the beginning of King _Henry_
VIIIth’s Reign, till of late Years, the Grand Feast was seldom observed
upon the precise Day of St. _George_; and that the occasion how both
Day and Feast came to be celebrated apart, took its rise from the
indulgence of the _Statutes_ in point of Prorogation: ’Tis necessary
farther to observe, that this Prorogation is of two sorts, either
Absolute, as being enjoined by the _Statutes_; or else Arbitrary, at
the Sovereign’s Pleasure, upon intervening Reasons.

In the first of these the Founder’s _Statutes_ enjoin, _That if the
Feast of St._ George _shall happen within fifteen Days next after_
Easter Day, _it shall be prorogued to the Sunday Fortnight, or fifteen
Days after_ Easter Day. And the reason is there given, _That every of
the_ Knights-Companions _might have opportunity of coming thereto,
without being constrained to ride upon any of those three Holy Days
preceeding_ Easter Day. The same Rule for Prorogation, where there is a
concurrence of these two Feasts, is likewise enjoin’d by the _Statutes_
of King _Henry_ V. and King _Henry_ VIII.

And when the Grand Feast, in this case of _Easter_, has been
kept before the expiration of the said fifteen Days, the
_Knights-Companions_ then absent, to avoid the Penalty for their not
appearing, have made Excuse; that the ancient _Statutes_ of the _Order_
were violated in keeping the Feast within fifteen Days after _Easter_,
as was alledged when Sir _John Denham_, Lord Treasurer, as President,
held the Feast of St. _George_ at _Windsor_, 24 _April_, 8 _Henry_ VII.

Anciently, where the _Register_ mentions the Grand Feast to be held at
_Windsor_, beyond the Day of St. _George_, ’tis observable upon
Calculation, that _Easter Day_, in those times, fell too near the 23d
of _April_, to celebrate the Feast on, without breaking the Law, which
was the real cause of those Prorogations, of which there are many
Instances.

And as the _Knights-Companions_ had Prohibitions put upon the
Solemnization of their Feast, in case of its interfering with _Easter_,
so had the Church of _England_, in their Observation of St. _George_’s
_Day_, in reference to several other Festivals; and this continued till
the time of the Reformation begun by King _Edward_ VI. but since the
Grand Feast has been celebrated upon any of them indifferently the
Feast of _Easter_ only excepted.

The second sort of Prorogations, which are meerly Arbitrary, and wholly
dependent on the Sovereign’s Pleasure, yet warranted sufficiently from
the Words, _Causa postulante_, mentioned in King _Henry_ VIII’s
Statutes; as likewise the great Latitude given the Sovereigns of this
most Noble _Order_, in reference to their Affairs, in the same
Statutes: The first Precedent of which was, _Anno_ 5 _Hen._ V. when
about _August_, four Months after St. _George_’s _Day_, that King being
engaged in the Wars of _France_, ordered the Feast to be celebrated at
_Caen_ in _Normandy_, and with great Solemnity created fifteen Knights
into the _Order_.

There are several other Examples, particularly one 8 _Hen._ VIII. when
the King being at _Eltham_ on St. _George_’s _Day_, it was in a
_Chapter_ there held, Decreed, That the accustomed Feast of St.
_George_ should be observed at _Windsor_ 25th of _May_ ensuing. And
from this time it became Annually customary, to keep the Day of St.
_George_ where the Sovereign at that time made his Abode: On which Day,
and the Day after, the usual Solemnities were observed. But as to the
Solemnization of the Grand Feast itself, that was in one of the
_Chapters_ then held, adjourned to some farther time, and then
solemnized at _Windsor_ by Prorogation, not by the Sovereigns
themselves, but by their _Lieutenants_ and their _Assistants_ appointed
for that purpose.

But to proceed with the Causes of Prorogation, which were either for
some weighty reasons, or upon emergent Occasions; _Anno_ 1 _Mariæ_, the
Sovereign celebrating the Feast of St. _George_ at St. _James_’s,
_Philip_, Prince of _Spain_, and the Earl of _Sussex_, were on the
Morrow after elected into the _Order_; whereupon it was likewise
Decreed, that the Inauguration of these two _elect Knights_, till the
Prince came to _England_, which happening _21st July_ following, the
Grand Feast, together with that of the _elect Knights_ Installations,
were appointed to be celebrated at the same time.

Again 3 and 4 _Phil._ and _Mar._ at a _Chapter_ held _22d April_, the
Feast of St. _George_, together with the Installation of three _elect
Knights_, was appointed to be held at _Windsor_ the _9th_ of _May_
ensuing; and by a _Chapter_ summon’d the _3d_ of _May_, before the
appointed Day for holding the Feast, the same was prorogued to the
_15th_ of _December_ following, upon the pressing Affairs of the King
and Queen. But before that design’d time came, another _Chapter_ was
held on the _31st_ of _October_, wherein it was again prorogu’d to the
first Sunday after _Twelfth-day_, viz. _9 January_, if by that time the
King, who was then in _Flanders_, should return to _England_: But that
not happening, it was farther prorogu’d to the _20th_ of _February_;
and thence, by another Decree, to St. _George_’s _Day_. Of which there
are many other Examples, and sometimes upon other Occasions; but still
at the Sovereign’s Pleasure.


                    _Of Commissions of Prorogation._

§ 9. There is no Precedent of Commissions for Prorogation, ancienter
than 12 _Car._ I. left by Sir _Thomas Rowe_, wherein Notice is taken of
all the Adjournments of the Grand Feasts, from St. _George_’s _Day_
preceeding, till that Time, with the Reasons thereof, and chiefly upon
Consideration of the spreading Sickness, together with a Command to the
_Knights-Companions_, and the Officers of the _Order_, to attend the
Sovereign on the new assign’d Days for celebrating the Feast.

As to the Substance hereof, the succeeding Commissions very near agree,
yet with some little Difference; as first, the Preambles are general,
and run thus: _Whereas, upon special Reasons, and other important
Affairs_, &c. except the Commission issu’d _25th February_, 1637. where
the Preamble was fitted to a special Occasion, and runs thus,——_Whereas
we have determined to create the Prince, our eldest Son, a Knight, and
to propose him in Election as a Companion of our most Noble_ Order,
_for the more Conveniency of his_ Installation, _We have thought fit to
defer the Feast of St._ George, _&c._

But in the Commissions of Prorogation of the Grand Feast, _25th
February_, 19 _Car._ I. the Place appointed for Celebration is omitted,
which Defect we find in the above-mentioned Precedent also; yet
afterwards that material Part came to be inserted, and first of all in
that Commission of the _26th February_, 14 _Car._ I. where the Place,
being the City of _York_, is put into the Body of the Commission. And
when the Civil War drew on, and the Sovereign could not well ascertain
any Place, then the Grand Feast was appointed to be kept at any such
Place as, on a nearer View, should seem convenient; afterwards it
vary’d something, and came to be inserted thus,—_Wheresoever We shall
then be_; or thus, _at such Places as We shall timely appoint_.

The most ordinary course, preparatory to the issuing such Commissions
of Prorogation, has been by the Sovereign’s Declaration in _Chapter_,
or otherwise the Signification of his Pleasure to the Chancellor of the
_Order_ at any other Time, who thereupon drew up the Commission, and
presented it to the Sovereign for his Sign Manual, and then affixed
thereto the great Seal of the _Order_. But where the Chancellor was not
at Hand to receive the Sovereign’s Commands, in this Case it was
convey’d to him by some other Hand, with command to summon the
_Knights-Companions_ and Officers accordingly. For so it was done to
Sir _Francis Windebank_, Knt. Secretary of State, by his Letter to Sir
_Thomas Rowe_, 13 _Car._ I. for Prorogation of the Grand Feast.

And as all the preceeding Adjournments of the Grand Feast have been
either decreed in _Chapter_, or directed immediately from the
Sovereign; so there is a Precedent where the _Lieutenant_ has been
impowered to prorogue the same; yet to the Time and Place appointed by
the Sovereign, and inserted in the Commission of _Lieutenancy_: And
this was in a Commission, 1 _Jac._ I. directed to _Charles_, Earl of
_Nottingham_.


       _That the Grand Feast ought to be celebrated once a Year._

§ 10. Though the Prorogations of the Grand Feast have been occasionally
made use of on the aforesaid important Reasons, yet no such Adjournment
or Prorogation is legally to be inlarged beyond St. _George_’s _Day_
ensuing; because once within the compass of every Year, the Grand Feast
ought to be solemniz’d; for so it was ordained by the _Statutes_ at the
Institution of the _Order_, and confirmed likewise by the succeeding
_Statutes_. And when our Historians take notice of the Grand Feast,
they speak of the same thing, that it ought Annually to be performed;
whence it is frequently called in the Registers, _Annua Festivitatis_,
_solemnitas annua_, _celebritas annua_, and the like.

Of late Times, an Occasion happen’d that brought this of the
_Statutes_, into a solemn Debate in _Chapter_, which, for the Result
thereof, became very remarkable.


       _At a_ Chapter _held at_ White-Hall, _2d_ February, 1640.

_The Sovereign propos’d to the_ Knights-Companions, _that having
prorogued the Celebration of St._ George’_s_ Feast _from time to time,
to the_ 1st, 2d, _and_ 3d _of_ March, _so near Lent, that if the Feast
were not held on these Days, it could not be done within the compass of
that Year; because the_ 23d _of_ April, _for the next Year, did fall
on_ Good-Friday, _and so consequently must have been kept in Lent this
Year, or not at all; and considering the great and important Affairs of
the Parliament, he moved the Question, whether, if there were no Feast
kept this Year, it would be any Blemish to the Honour of the_ Order?
_And whether he might not dispence with the_ Statute, _and defer it
till next Year? They all confessed the Sovereign’s dispensing Power;
yet some of the_ Knights _seeing from the Institution to that Time, no
Precedent was found where the Grand Feast had been wholly omitted, but
that some of the Sovereigns, even though engaged in War beyond Sea,
either solemniz’d the Feast in their own Presence, or by Commission in_
England, _which was averred by the_ Chancellor _to be both the
fundamental and constant Practice, humbly besought the Sovereign not to
begin to make any Breach in the constant_ Order, _so long and
uninterruptedly continued. Whereupon it was resolv’d, by general Vote,
that the Feast should be celebrated on the aforesaid Days of
Prorogation._

By which Determination it sufficiently appears, of what Moment the
Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ then conceiv’d it to the Honour of
the _Order_, to follow the _Statutes_, for the Celebration of the Grand
Feast once every Year. Besides, it is observable, that it was not
thought expedient to be dispens’d with, even on the most pressing and
important Occasions. But rather than the _Statutes_ should suffer any
Violation, the Feast was then solemniz’d, tho’ they were so straiten’d,
in point of time, as not to have above two Days to make Preparation for
it.

And though indeed, on the breaking out of the unhappy Civil War, the
Sovereign was oblig’d to defer the Solemnity from Year to Year, it was
not to be look’d on as any Precedent; and on the Restauration of King
_Charles_ II. it renew’d its former _Order_.




                               CAP. XIX.

          _Of Preparations for the Grand Feast of the_ Order.


           _Of Letters giving Notice of the Time and Place._

§ 1. Among many other things which are necessary to be prepar’d
beforehand; the first of Course is, the Letters directed to all the
_Knights-Companions_ and Officers of the _Order_, resident within the
Kingdom, to give them Notice of the Time and Place, when and where
the Feast is to be held. (2.) Letters of Dispensation to such
Knights, as the Sovereign shall please to excuse from their
Attendance at the Feast. (3.) Commissions of Lieutenancy, (or
sometimes of Assistance) when the Sovereign cannot personally
solemnize the same. (4.) Warrants for the Removal of Atchievements,
if there be then Occasion. (5.) Escutcheons and Stiles, to be set on
the back of each _Knight-Companion’s_ Stall, if the Feast be held
elsewhere than at _Windsor_. (6.) The Chappel to be decently adorn’d.
(7.) The great Hall, or other Place, for the Grand Dinner, to be
prepar’d, and very nobly furnish’d. (8.) And lastly, Officers to be
appointed, besides those of the _Order_ of Arms, who are to give
peculiar Attendance on the Sovereign, at this Grand Solemnity.

As to the first of these Points, the Chancellor is to attend the
Sovereign some convenient Time before the approach of St. _George_’s
_Day_, to learn his Pleasure therein, and whether he is inclined to
Prorogue the Day, _&c._

If the Sovereign be inclin’d to a Prorogation, then the Chancellor is
to draw up a Commission for that purpose. After this, Letters issu’d
out anciently under the Sovereign’s Sign Manual, both to his
Lieutenant, when he holds not the Feast personally, and the
_Knights-Companions_, giving them notice of the Time and Place; but of
late the Chancellor hath been appointed to dispatch these Letters in
his own Name.

But whether the Feast be held upon St. _George_’s _Day_, or any other,
by Prorogation, the Sovereign’s Pleasure was usually known so long
before the appointed Time, that these circular Letters issu’d out
sometimes two, three, four, five, or six Months, before the assign’d
Day. And in Cases where there has been farther Prorogations, Care has
been taken to issue out new Commissions, in the like convenient Time,
before the old were expir’d; as may be observ’d by what has gone
before; that so those _Knights Companions_, who are most remote from
Court, may have sufficient Time to prepare; either for Attendance, or,
on just Occasion, to apply themselves to the Sovereign, for Letters of
Dispensation for Absence: And farther, that the absent Knights may
thereby take notice of the Day set, because such are oblig’d to hold
the Feast in their own Houses, at the same Time.

Besides the Letters directed to the _Knights-Companions_; the
Chancellor is likewise to write his Letters to each of the Officers of
the _Order_, to give them the like notice.


         _Of Dispensations for not attending the Grand Feast._

§ 2. It having been complained of by the Chancellor of the _Order_, and
taken notice of by the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_, in a Chapter
held at the Celebration of the Grand Feast, 13 _Car._ I. at
_White-Hall_:

_That of late Years, divers_ Knights-Companions _had neglected, both
their Attendance on the Sovereign at the Feast of St._ George, _or to
send, under their Seals of Arms, their probable Excuses, and Petitions
for Licence and Dispensation, contrary to the most ancient_ Statutes,
_and their Duty._

It was therefore, among many other things, decreed, _That for the
future, every Knight of the_ Order _should be bound to attend on the
usual Days, or such as should be assigned by Prorogation_: But in Case
of Sickness, or other important Business to retard them, they shou’d,
under their Seals of Arms to the Chancellor, signify the Reasons for
requiring a Dispensation for their Absence, twenty Days at least before
the usual, or assigned Time, to be presented by him to the Sovereign;
and on Neglect of so doing, except in sudden Accidents, should not be
excused, but incur the Penalty of the _Statutes_.

And it is evident, that this way of enjoining the _Knights-Companions_
to send the Reason that prevented their Attendance, under their Seals,
has been very ancient; for the _Black-Book_ records an _Order_ in
_Chapter_, held at a General Feast, 1 _Hen._ VI. to this very Purpose;
and enjoin’d farther, _That when such absent Knights were present at
the next Feast, they should be oblig’d to give the Reason why they
should not incur the Penalty of their former Absence, since the_
Statutes _enjoin it_.

In Pursuance of the beforementioned Decree, Sir _Thomas Rowe_, then
Chancellor, added to those his Letters, dated 18 _May_, 1637, and
directed to the _Knights-Companions_, under the Seal of the _Order_,
this following Postscript.

_According to two Acts made in_ Chapter, _in the Presence of the
Sovereign_, 18 April, 1637. _concerning the Neglect of the_
Knights-Companions, _in their Attendance upon his Majesty at the Feast
of St._ George, _and a Command expresly receiv’d to signify so much to
your_ Lordship; _I have the true Copies of the Acts themselves, it
being resolv’d, in Case of Omission of your lawful and timely Excuse,
under your Seal of Arms, and in Occasion of Absence, in keeping the
Solemnity in your own House, that no Dispensation shall be given, but
your_ Lordship _shall incur the Penalties of the ancient_ Statutes;
_which are, That you shall not be permitted to the_ Chapter, _nor to
your Seat, the next Year; but shall stand before it, as do the_
Choiristers: _In Procession then you shall go before, and not in your
Place among the Knights, and shall Offer last; and that this Penance
being done, you shall come before the Seat of the Sovereign, and ask
Absolution: But if two Years successively your_ Lordship _shall omit
your Attendance, or timely Suit for Dispensation, you shall pay twenty
Marks, and that Sum to be doubled for every Year of such Omission, till
you are reconcil’d, and pardon’d by the Sovereign, whereof I beseech
your_ Lordship _to take Knowledge._

It afterwards appears, by an _Order_ past in _Chapter_, _9th October_,
15 _Car._ I. that this early Notice to be given from such of the
_Knights-Companions_ as, upon the Reasons already mention’d, should be
absent, was design’d chiefly in Favour of the Officers of the
Sovereign’s _Houshold_, who, by knowing in due Time who should be
absent, and who not, might make timely and certain Provision for the
Feast.

Upon Notice sent by the Chancellor, to the _Knights-Companions_, as
aforesaid, if any of them should happen to be any way indispos’d, or
have other lawful Excuse for not repairing to Court, and attending the
Feast, they may acquaint the Chancellor therewith, whose Duty it is to
represent it to the Sovereign, and thereon to procure his Letters of
Dispensation for their Absence, if the Sovereign consents.

Which Letters are to be convey’d by _Garter_, or carry’d by
whomsoever he shall appoint; for which there was a Fee by the Mile
allowed him, by the following _Order_, past at a Meeting held by the
_Knights-Commissioners_, for regulating Points relating to the
_Order_, 13 _Car._ I.

_Whereas it having anciently been the Office of_ Garter, King _of_
Arms, _to disperse and send Letters of Prorogation, Dispensation, and
other Commands of the Sovereign, to the absent Knights, which in many
Cases must be chargeable, it was this Day order’d, That if he should
send any Act of Favour or Dispensation to any Knight, absent from his
Majesty’s Court, or four Miles from the City of_ London, _he to whom
such Dispensation should be sent, should pay his Servant or Messenger,
for every Day’s Travel, as much as is allow’d and paid any other
Messengers of his Majesty’s House or Chamber._

Variety of Occasions and Accidents, as Grounds to move the Sovereign,
and Inducements to obtain his Dispensation, are extant in several
Letters sent to Sir _Thomas Rowe_, when Chancellor, on the aforesaid
Injunctions, decreed 13 _Car._ I. but they all agree in the Causes we
have mentioned.


                    _Of Commissions of Lieutenancy._

§ 3. Touching the third particular, and preparing Commissions of
Lieutenancy, in such Cases where the Sovereign cannot personally
celebrate the Feast; as also Commissions for those whom he thinks fit
to appoint for his _Assistants_, the Reader is referr’d to the Head in
the next _Chapter_, under which there is an Account of constituting a
_Lieutenant_; and here only observe, that the Chancellor is to draw up
these Commissions, and attend the Sovereign for his Hand, and after to
pass them under the Great Seal of the _Order_.


              _Warrant for the Removal of Atchievements._

§ 4. If there be Occasion for Removal of any of the
_Knights-Companions_ Atchievements, at the Grand Feast, which indeed
has seldom happen’d, unless an Installation were celebrated at the same
time, then does the Chancellor obtain the Sovereign’s Warrant, directed
to _Garter_, for the Performance thereof: But of this we have already
said sufficient, under the Head of Preparations made for Personal
Installations of a _Knight-Companion_.


                   _Escutcheons of Arms and Stiles._

§ 5. Heretofore, when the Celebrations of St. _George_’s _Day_ were
kept at any other Place besides _Windsor Castle_, it was thought most
necessary to provide large Paper Escutcheons; wherein were Marshalled
the Arms and Quarterings of the Sovereign, and each _Knight-Companion_,
in Metal and Colour, encompass’d with a _Garter_; and thereon Crowns,
Caps, or Coronets, peculiar to each Dignity, with their Stiles and
Titles fairly printed underneath, (but without Crests or Supporters,)
to be set on the Back-side of their Stalls, on the Eve of the Feast:
But the Sovereign’s Arms were impaled with those of St. _George_, over
which an imperial Crown was plac’d, and these, (in Defect of the Plates
and Banners, set over their Stalls, in the Choir of St. _George_’s
_Chappel_ at _Windsor_,) did serve for Directions for the
_Knights-Companions_, that, by the view of them, they might the more
readily and certainly know their proper Stalls.

We have not met with any Memorial of this Usage, that reacheth higher
than _Anno_ 21 _Hen._ VII. when the Sovereign, holding the Day of St.
_George_ at _Cambridge_, _King’s College Chappel_ was furnish’d with
Escutcheons of the _Knights-Companions_ Arms; but to shew the Use was
ancient, there is this Note put into the Memorial, [as was Yearly
accustomed,] _Anno_ 22 _Hen._ VIII. the Sovereign being at _Windsor_ on
the Eve of St. _George_, appointed the Service of the Church to be
celebrated in his Chappel, in the upper Quadrangle of _Windsor Castle_;
and there being present with him thirteen _Knights-Companions_, each of
them had set over their Heads an Escutcheon of their Arms.

This Manner the Stalls were afterwards solemnly establish’d, and
enlarged to absent Knights, by an _Order_ of _Chapter_, held at
_Greenwich_, _Anno_ 3 _Edward_ VI. wherein the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_ agreed, that from thenceforth every Stall, upon
St. _George_’s _Eve_, should have an Escutcheon of the Arms of them
which are absent, as well as those that were present, at their several
Costs and Charges:

But this cannot be understood of the Stalls situate in the Chappel of
St. _George_ at _Windsor_; for besides, that we have met with no
ancient Account of any such Custom in that Place, we find a Memorial,
rather implying the contrary; when Queen _Elizabeth_, in the sixth Year
of her Reign, held the Feast of St. _George_ upon its proper Day, at
_Windsor Castle_; namely, that there was no Escutcheons of the
_Knights-Companions_ Arms set up there, but only the Plates; and
without all doubt, had it been the Usage to fix Escutcheons in the
Choir of that Chappel, as at other Places, they would not at that time
especially have been omitted; because then the Sovereign appear’d upon
an extraordinary Occasion, and where many things were added to heighten
the Glory of that Grand Feast, by Reason the Peace between _England_
and _France_ was to be proclaimed at this Festival, in the Presence of
the _French_ Ambassador, and was accordingly done with great Solemnity
on St. _George_’s _Day_ in the Morning, at the East-Entrance in the
lower Ward of the Castle, at the top of the Hill towards St. _George_’s
_Chappel_; and to which Place the Sovereign, in her whole Habit of the
_Order_, (the _French_ Ambassador being near her,) with the five
Officers of the _Order_, and _Knights-Companions_ before her, and
before them the Officers of Arms and Trumpets, proceeding in a stately
and well order’d Cavalcade; and after _Clarenceux_, King of Arms, had
ended the Proclamation, they continu’d the Proceeding thence to the
Chappel, in the same State and Order.

As to the Practice and constant Usage of setting up Escutcheons of
Arms, since _Anno_ 3 _Edward_ VI. and at such time as St. _George_’s
_Day_ was held elsewhere than at _Windsor_, we have seen Variety of
Testimonies.

The Care of ordering and providing of which belong’d to _Garter_; but
the Sovereign of the _Order_ was at the Charge, (notwithstanding the
said Order, _Anno_ 3 _Edw._ VI.) which heretofore we see was paid out
of the Treasury in the _Exchequer_; and since the Establishment of 1200
_l. per Annum_, (settled by the late Sovereign King _Charles_ I. to
discharge the ordinary and extraordinary Expences of the _Order_,) the
Allowance issu’d thence, and was paid by the Chancellor of the _Order_;
but now the Charge is plac’d upon _Garter_, he having an Allowance
therefore included in the Augmentation of his Pension, _Anno_ 15 _Car._
II.

We find Privy Seals to have issu’d as high as the fifteenth of Queen
_Elizabeth_, for the Annual Allowance of 7 _l._ for Escutcheons
imploy’d for the Use aforesaid, and that the Price some time before was
about that rate; for the three and twenty Escutcheons, provided against
St. _George_’s _Feast_, _Anno_ 1 and 2 _Phil._ and _Mar._ came to 6
_l._ 1 _s._ and 8 _d._ and those five and twenty set up the following
Year, 6 _l._ 11 _s._ and 8 _d._ some Differences then also being in the
Work, which enhanc’d the Price, _viz._ those provided for Princes, at 6
_s._ and 8 _d._ a Piece, and each of the rest at 5 _s._

The Sovereign, the Prince of _Wales_, and Stranger Kings and Princes,
have accustomably had, at these Times, Majesty Escutcheons set up over
each of their Stalls; but the rest of the _Knights-Companions_, Lodging
Escutcheons only; and we have seen an Account of some Majesty
Escutcheons prepar’d for every St. _George_’s _Feast_, from 1613, to
1619; to wit, one for the Sovereign, another for the King of _Denmark_,
a third for the Prince of _Wales_, and a fourth for _Frederick_, Count
Palatine of the _Rhine_, at 6 _s._ and 8 _d._ a piece; but so many
_Knights-Companions_ as attended the Sovereign at those Feasts, had
each a Lodging Escutcheon, at 2 _s._ and 6 _d._

From the Marshalling of Arms, quarter’d in the _Knights-Companions_
Escutcheons, and ordering their Stiles, (printed always in _French_)
there are several things no less useful than worthy of Observation;
for, first, though the Plates of Arms and Quarterings, fix’d in each
_Knight-Companion’s_ Stall at _Windsor_, continue there without
Alteration, or very seldom chang’d from that Order wherein they were
Marshall’d at that Time of their Installation; yet these Escutcheons
and Stiles Annually set up, do admit of frequent Alteration, as there
is Occasion; either by adding more Quarterings, altering the Stiles, or
amending any thing that is amiss.

For Instance: Whereas the Duke of _Savoy_, before 5 _Eliz._ bore _Gules
a cross Argent_, it was then alter’d into five Coats; that is to say,
in the first Quarter, _Westphalia_, _Saxe-Moderne_ and _Angria_; in the
second, _Chablais_; in the third, _Aouste_, and the fourth as the
first; and over all, in the middle, the aforesaid Escutcheon of _Savoy_.

When the Lord _Hunsdon_ was install’d, _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ he had twelve
Coats of Arms, thus Marshall’d in his Plate; four, four, and four; the
first _Carey_, the second _Spencer_, the third _Somerset_, the fourth
_Bullen_, the fifth _Ormond_, the sixth _Hoo_, the seventh _Rochford_,
the eighth _Seyntomer_, the ninth _Malmains_, the tenth _Wichingham_,
the eleventh St. _Leger_, and the twelfth _Hangford_; but _Anno_ 7
_Eliz._ his Escutcheon receiv’d an Addition of four other Coats, _viz._
_Beuchamp_, _Warwick_, _Berkley_, and _Gerard_, and they were inserted
next to _Somerset_, the third Coat in this said Plate.

But on the contrary, where _Ambrose_, Earl of _Warwick_, had twenty one
Coats put into his Plate, _Anno_ 5 _Eliz._ and they Marshall’d in this
Order, five, five, five, and six; namely, first _Sutton_, second
_Paganell_, third _Grey_ of _Ruthin_, fourth _Hastings_, fifth
_Quincy_, sixth _Malpas_, seventh _Somery_, eighth _Valence_, ninth
_Talbott_, tenth _Warwick_, eleventh _Beauchamp_, twelfth _Berkley_,
thirteenth _Lisle_, fourteenth _Gerard_, fifteenth _Guilford_,
sixteenth _Houlden_, seventeenth _West_, eigthteenth and nineteenth
_Quarterly de la Ware_ and _Cantilupe_, twentieth _Mortimere_ of
_Wigmore_, and twenty one _Greely_; at the Feast of St. _George_ held
at _White-Hall_, _Anno_ 9 _Eliz._ his Escutcheon contain’d but sixteen;
_viz._ four, four, four, and four; namely, first _Sutton_, second
_Paganell_, third _Somery_, fourth _Malpas_, fifth _Grey_ of _Ruthin_,
sixth _Hastings_, seventh _Valence_, eighth _Ferrers_, ninth
_Quincess_, tenth _Chester_, eleventh _Talbott_, twelfth _Beauchamp_,
thirteenth _Warwick_, fourteenth _Berkley_, fifteenth _Gerard_,
sixteenth _Lisle_: So that there were seven Coats taken out of the
former; namely, _Guilford_, _Holden_, _West_, _de la Ware_ and
_Cantilupe_, _Quarterly Mortimere_ and _Greely_, and two added, _viz._
_Ferrers_ and _Chester_.

But the greatest and frequentest Variations are in the Stiles and
Titles of _Honour_, set under the Escutcheons, and these relate unto,
and are occasioned principally from their attaining or resigning of
Offices or Dignities.

We find that the Stile set under the Escutcheon of _Ferdinand_ the
Emperor, at St. _George_’s _Feast_, _Anno_ 1 and 2 _Phil._ and _Mar._
was as followeth.


_Du tres hault tres-Excellent & tres-Puissant Prince, Ferdinand, par la
grace de Dieu, Roy des Romaines, de Hungarie, & Bohemie, Arch-Duc
d’Austrie, Duc de Burgoigne_, &c. _Chevalier du tres-Noble Ordre de la
Jarretiere._


But _Anno_ 5 _Eliz._ in the said Emperor’s Stile, the Titles of King of
_Hungary_ and _Bohemia_ were left out; because _Maximilian_ his Son had
a little before obtain’d both those Kingdoms.

In the Reign of Queen _Elizabeth_, the Stiles of _Philip_, King of
_Spain_, who, while Queen _Mary_ lived, was Co-Sovereign of this most
Noble _Order_, run thus:


_Du tres Hault tres-Excellent and tres-Puissant Prince Philip, par la
grace de Dieu, Roy d’Espaigne, des Deux Cicels & Jerusalem, Arch-Duc
d’Austriæ, Duc de Burgoigne, Millan, & Brabant, Compte de Hapsburghe,
Flanders, & Tiroll; Chevalier du tres-Noble Ordre de la Jarretiere._


But at the Feasts of St. _George_, _Anno_ 28, 29, and 30 _Eliz._ the
Title of Catholick Prince was also given him.

The Instances relating to _Knights-Subjects_ are very many; there
having been almost every Year some Additions, or Omissions.

In the Duke of _Norfolk_’s Stile, _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ the _Lieutenantship
of the North_ was omitted. In the Earl of _Rutland_’s, at the same
Feast, _President of the Council in the Council in the North_, was
added. The Marquiss of _Winchester_ caus’d the Title of Baron _St.
John_ to be omitted, because his eldest Son bore that Title, and was a
Baron of Parliament.

It may be further observed, that a Stranger elect (having receiv’d the
_Habit_ and _Ensigns_ of the _Order_,) hath been allow’d the Honour of
having an Escutcheon of his Arms set on the back of that Stall design’d
for him, notwithstanding he has not been install’d.


                       _Of Adorning the Chappel._

§ 6. The Chappel where divine Service is celebrated, at the Time of the
Grand Feast; whether it be that of St. _George_’s at _Windsor_, or
elsewhere, as the Sovereign is pleas’d, hath at all Times been adorn’d
with rich Furniture; the Care and Oversight whereof at _Windsor_, is
committed to the Dean of the College, but at other Places, to the Dean
of the Chappel.

The _Altar_, by the Gift of pious Benefactors, was adorned with
Vessels, sumptuous both for their Materials and Workmanship; but _temp.
Hen._ VIII. and _Edw._ VI. most of them were dispos’d of, so that King
_James_ I.· taking notice that very little Plate, and other Ornaments,
were belonging to the Chappel, was pleas’d to make some Provision for
the adorning thereof, which was at length effected by the free
Contributions of the Knights themselves.

For at a _Chapter_ held at _White-Hall_, 16 _Jac._ I. it was decreed,
that every _Knight-Companion_ should give to the Use of the _Altar_, in
the said Chappel, a piece of _Plate_ of the Value of 20 _l._ at the
least.

This Decree was confirm’d, _Anno_ 6 _Car._ I. the Dean and Canons of
_Windsor_ being impower’d to demand and receive the Sums of Money, as
above, which they were to bestow in Plate for the Use of the _Altar_;
and accordingly they agreed for the Quantity of Plate hereafter
mention’d, which was deliver’d, _Anno_ 1637. _viz._


                                                 _Ou._ _Dr._
 Two little Candlesticks chas’d and gilt, for }
   Wax Candles                                }   092   06
 Two Chalices, with four Pattens                  113   01
 Two great Candlesticks, neat for Tapers          553   15
 Two little Basons                                251   15
 One great Bason                                  210   00
                                                  --------
                                                  _l._ _s._
 The Value at 12 _s._ the Ounce, came to          730   10
 Besides nine Cases                               009   10


But to make some farther Addition to the Glory of this _Altar_, King
_Charles_ II. at the time of his _Installation_, offer’d two large gilt
Water-pots, weighing 387 Ounces ten Peny Weight, amounting, by the
excellent Workmanship, to 12 _s._ the Ounce, and to the Sum of 232 _l._
10 _s._ Some sacred Ceremonies were perform’d at the Consecration of
this Plate, not very necessary to be spoke of here. But all these, with
the other Goods and Monuments belonging to the King’s free Chappel and
Treasury at _Windsor_, were rifl’d and taken away by the Parliament
Army. King _Charles_ II. therefore, after the Restauration, _Anno_
1667, by the Consent of the _Knights-Companions_, did levy and collect,
and by his own Bounty furnish’d the Chappel again with the following
Plate:

_A Pair of gilt Flaggons, bought with Money collected from the_ Knights
Companions, 150 _Ounces._

_A Pair of wrought Flaggons, with great Bellies, having the Figure of
St._ George _on Horseback on the Cover_, &c. _bought with the_ Knights
_Money_, 414 _Ounces._

_One small Bason._ 25 _Ounces and an half._

_A Pair of plain gilt Chalices and Covers, bought also with the_
Knights _Money_, 163 _Ounces and a quarter._

_A large Embost Bason, with the Figure of_ Mary Magdalen _washing our
Saviour’s Feet_, 198 _Ounces._

_A Pair of large Taper Candlesticks_, 264 _Ounces._


                     At the Charge of the College.

_A Pair of large Basons gilt and emboss’d, given by her Royal Higness
the Dutchess of_ York, 305 _Ounces._

_A plain gilt Corporas, the Gift of Sir_ Richard Fanshaw, 24 _Ounces._

_A double gilt Chalice, the Gift of the Lady_ Mary Heveningham, 33
_Ounces._

As to the Adorning, and Furniture of the Chappel, ’tis very sumptuous;
the particulars being not so very material, I shall here omit them.


                 _The Furnishing St._ George’_s_ Hall.

§ 7. The Care of making ready and furnishing St. _George_’s _Hall_, or
any Place, either there, or elsewhere, set apart for the Grand Dinner,
is committed partly to the Gentlemen Ushers of the _Black-Rod_, and
partly to the Sovereign’s Surveyer-General of his Works, both by
Warrant from the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold: They cause to be
prepar’d the Tables, and set in order the rich and costly Furniture.


      _Officers and Servants appointed to attend the Grand Feast._

§ 8. The principal Officers of the Grand Feast are serv’d by Noblemen,
whom the Sovereign appoints, and are put in a List, Sign’d by the Lord
Chamberlain of the Houshould, and deliver’d to the _Black-Rod_, who
gives them Notice some convenient time before the Feast, that they may
the better perform the Duty of their several Places; of what Quality
they usually are, will appear by the following List.

Those that gave their Attendance at the Grand Feast, _Anno_ 14 _Car._
II. when the Sovereign was install’d, were,

 For the Sword,       The Earl of _Northampton_.
 The great Bason,     The Earls of _Bedford_, _Hertford_, _Clare_,
   St. _Albans_, and the Lord _Herbert_ of _Ragland_.
 The Cup-bearer,      The Earl of _Essex_.
 The Carver,          The Earl of _Carlisle_.
 The Sewer,           The Earl of _Dover_.
 The Surnap,          The Earl of _Elgin_.
 The Ewer,            The Earl of _Devonshire_.
 The Train,           The Lords _Russel_, _Herbert_, and _Cranborne_.

The Gentlemen of the Sovereign’s Privy-Chamber in waiting bear the
Canopy, and the Sovereign’s Officers and Servants following, (having
notice from the Lord Chamberlain,) give their Attendance; as appears by
the List of those appointed to give their Attendance at _Windsor_,
_Anno_ 23 _Car._ II.


           Lord Chamberlain, and Servants.
           Groom of the Stool.
           Bed-Chamber Men.
           Secretaries of State.
           Gentlemen-Ushers of the Privy-Chamber.
           Mr. Vice Chamberlain.
           Gentlemen of the Bed Chamber.
           Privy Purse.
           Secretaries of _Scotland_.
           Twelve Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber in waiting.
           Four Gentlemen Ushers daily Waiters.
           Two Cup-bearers.
           Eight Quarter Waiters, Gentlemen Ushers.
           Two Chaplains.
           Two Physicians.
           Two Chirurgeons.
           Mrs. Sempstress and Landress to his Majesty.
           Four Grooms of the Chamber.
           Fourteen Lords to attend his Majesty.
           Officers of the Guard.
           Yeomen of the Guard.
           Three Masters of the Tents.
           Master of the Ceremonies.
           Aid of the Ceremonies.
           Jewel-House.
           Musicians.
           Yeomen of the Bows and Guns.
           Captain Cook, and the Children of the Chappel.
           Two Carvers.
           Two Sewers.
           Two Pages of the Presence.
           Two Esquires of the Body.
           Two Apothecaries.
           Four Serjeants at Arms.
           Eight Sewers of the Chamber.
           Pages of the back Stairs.
           Captain of the Guards.
           Officers of the Robes.
           Two Grooms of the Privy-Chamber.
           Groom Porter.
           Marshal of the Ceremonies.
           Removing Wardrobe.
           Gentlemen of the Chappel.
           Five Messengers.
           Sixteen Trumpeters.
           Serjeant Trumpeter.
           Drum Major.
           Four Drummers and a Fife.




                                CAP. XX.

      _The Order of the Ceremonies on the Eve of the Grand Feast._


                 _Of the beginning of the Grand Feast._

§ 1. The Celebration of the Grand Feast, with the Ceremonies, devis’d
to set forth and illustrate the Glory thereof, hath been worthy the
observation of the first Institutor, and all succeeding Sovereigns;
well knowing that what is once slightly observ’d will soon fall into
disesteem, if not into contempt. Therefore they have been very
particular to the Day, the Hour, and the Place, where the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_ are to meet.

As to the first, although St. _George_’s _Day_ (or such other Day as
the Sovereign shall please to nominate and appoint, by Prorogation in
lieu thereof,) be the Principal and Grand Day of the Feast, yet the Eve
of that Day does the Feast take Commencement, and determines not till
the third Day following; the whole Solemnity taking up three Days
inclusively.

And this is clear from several Articles of the _Statutes_, wherein the
course of the Ceremonies to be observ’d at the Grand Solemnity are set
down; whether observed, on the Eve, the Feast-Day, or the Morrow after:
And these three Days together did the Sovereign hold the Grand Feast,
whether they personally celebrated the same, or deputed other of the
_Knights-Companions_ to that Employment, the cause of the Commissions
of Deputation limitting their Power either in general, _during the time
of the Feast_; or in particular, upon the Day of St. _George_, the Day,
and that following, _viz._ the last Day of the Feast. In like manner,
when in succeeding Times, Commissions of Prorogation of the Grand Feast
were made use of, we find the three Days continuance of the Feast to be
particularly mentioned in the Body of those Commissions: Namely, the
Day wherein, by such Appointment, the Feast was to begin, the Grand Day
it self, and the Day whereon it ended.

The Directions given in the _Statutes_, for the Order and Course of
this Solemnity, to begin with the Eve, run thus: Every Year upon St.
_George_’s _Eve_, shall be an Assembly, or Meeting of all the
_Knights-Companions_ of the _Order_, at _Windsor Castle, &c._ and the
same is positively enjoin’d by all the other Bodies of the _Statutes_.

And as the Grand Feast is generally said to Commence _in Vigilia Sancti
Georgii_, or as it is otherwise exprest in the _Black-Book_, in
_Vigilia in future celebratis_, or, _Vigiliis Divi Georgii_, or in
_Vigilia Festi_. So has the time of this preceeding Day several other
Denominations given it in the same _Register_, _Vesper ante Diem Sancti
Georgii_; _in Vesperiis Georgianis_, _in Vesperiis Festi_, _in
Vesperiis Commitionem_; and at other times, _pridie Divi Georgii_,
_pridie Georgianæ Solemnitatis_, _pridie Festi_, _pridie feriarum Divi
Georgii_, and sometimes _per vigilia_, and lastly in plain _English_,
St. _George_’s _Eve_; all which signify one and the same thing, and are
but various Names given to the Evening of the Day foregoing either that
of St. _George_, or that whereon the Grand Feast is appointed to be
held by Prorogation.

Thus we see that the Founder began his Solemnity upon the Eve of the
Feast Day; which doubtless was in conformity to the Custom of the
Church, who made the _Vigils_ and _Eves_ part of the ensuing Festivals,
and as Ushers to the Grand Solemnities.

As the Eve was appointed by the Founder for the Commencement of the
Anniversary of the Grand Feast, so to make the time more certain, the
_Statutes_ express the exact Hour of meeting for beginning the
Solemnities, to be at the Hour of _Tierce_, which in many other Places
is called, _Hora Tertiarum_. But this seemed not sufficient to express
clear enough the meaning of a Law, where a Penalty was enjoined, and
therefore at a _Chapter_ held at _Windsor_, 17 _Edw._ IV. a scruple
arising among the _Knights-Companions_, concerning the Words _Hora
Tertiarum_, whether they were intended to mean three in the Afternoon,
or at the Hour of the Church, generally used after Prime Noon before;
and fixed it to the latter.

The _Registrum Chartaceum_ Records the same Explanation of the Words;
and to let us see that ’twas immediately put in Practice, it is there
entered with the Names of those _Knights-Companions_ present with the
Sovereign, both in the Morning and Evening of the same Day.

Another Instance of which there is, 3 _Hen._ VII. on the Eve of the
Grand Feast, held by Prorogation at _Windsor_, where the Sovereign, in
regard of the arrival of several Ambassadors, put off the usual
_Chapter_ till Noon; whence it is evident, that the Custom at this time
was likewise to begin the Solemnity in the Morning.

But notwithstanding the said Decree of King _Edw._ IV. we find it
_Anno_ 11 _Hen._ VIII. to be meant and intended for three in the
Afternoon. And when King _Henry_ VIII. came to Model the _Statutes_ of
the _Order_, in two several Articles, he declares and expounds the
_Hora Tertia_, (which the _English_ Version of those _Statutes_ renders
the _Hour_ of _Tierce_,) to be the _Hora Tertia post Merediem_, three
in the Afternoon; and in another Article of the same _Statutes_, _Hora
Tertiarum, id est, Hora Tertiarum post Merediem_; and elsewhere, _Hora
Tertia Vespertina vel Pomeridiana_; which Hour, as it was then settled
to be the punctual time for the _Knights-Companions_ meeting, to enter
on the Solemnity of the Feast, so has it ever since continued
unaltered, and usually observed.

The Place of Assembly for the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_, hath
usually been in such of the Sovereign’s Privy Lodgings, both at
_Windsor_, or elsewhere, as he hath appointed; frequently in the Privy,
Withdrawing, or Bed Chambers: To this appointed Place the
_Knights-Companions_ repair, to give their Attendance on the Sovereign,
having first invested themselves in full Robes, either in their own
Lodgings, or some convenient Room at Court, where _Garter_ is to attend
them, with notice of the approaching Hour.

The _Knights-Companions_ being come to the Sovereign, as likewise the
Officers of the _Order_, habited in their _Mantles_, and bearing in
their Hands the _Symbols_ of their several Offices, they wait the
Sovereign’s being vested in his Robes, till he passes into the Presence
Chamber, or give beginning to the Feast, by opening the _Chapter_ at
their meeting, before he goes thither.

About the same time, the Provincial _Kings_, _Heralds_, and
_Pursuivants_, wearing their Coats of the Sovereign’s Arms; so also the
Band of Pensioners, armed with their Pole Axes, Assemble in the
Presence Chamber; but the Prebends of the College, vested in their
Taffaty Mantles over their Surplices, and _Alms-Knights_ in their
_Mantles_ and _Surcoats_, come no nearer than the Guard Chamber.

Lastly, The Servants and Attendants of the _Knights-Companions_ meet
without the Guard Chamber Door, whence spreading themselves down the
Stairs, through the Stone Gallery, into the upper Ward of the Castle,
or as far as their Number will reach, all wait the Sovereign’s coming
forth into the Presence.

It will be necessary here to inform the Reader, in regard not only the
Feast Day of St. _George_, but the Grand Feast held in Honour of the
_Order_, hath been kept in several other Places besides _Windsor
Castle_, more particularly, at _White-Hall_, St. _James_’s,
_Greenwich_, and _York_; that there are many Ceremonies, and other
Particulars hereafter named, which alter not with the Place; but
appertain to the Festival, and are therefore to be observed every where
alike; as for instance, the form of Proceeding, the manner of holding
_Chapters_, the Ceremony of Offering Gold and Silver, Swearing of
Officers, and such like: But others there are, which are precisely
local and particular, as the _Prebends_ and _Alms-Knights_ going in the
Proceeding, the Offering up of Atchievements, _&c._ to _Windsor_ only.

Since the withdrawing the Grand Feast from _Windsor_, some of the
Officers of Arms, curious in the Observation of these Solemnities,
performed in other Places, have afforded us great Plenty of Memorials,
relating to the ceremonious Part thereof, while the same was continued
at _Windsor_; and therefore, when the true Place where the Instance
lies, shall be also cited, the Reader is not to conclude that the
Precedent urged doth not full enough answer the Purpose, unless it had
been likewise fetched from _Windsor_. But that in this case, the
Ceremony or Example is such, as is peculiar to the Feast, not the
Place, and ought to be observed without alteration at any Place, where
the Sovereign shall keep the Grand Feast.


                 _Of setting the Proceeding in Order._

§ 2. In Times past, the _Knights-Companions_ appeared at the Grand
Feast, attended with a numerous Train of Servants and other Dependents;
but the Feast having removed from _Windsor_ to other Places, much of
this ancient Splendor was laid aside; yet upon King _James_ I.
Accession to the Crown, somewhat of this Glory began to revive; for we
find it entered upon the _Register_, in the fourth of his Reign; _That
the ancient Custom, which for some Years had been intermitted, wherein,
at the Solemnity of this Feast, all the_ Knights-Companions _were wont
to go attended, each with a large Train, was recalled and brought back
into use_.

But this heighth of Gallantry and Splendor in the Number of Attendants,
and richness of their Apparel, within ten Years grew up to such Excess,
or rather Exorbitancy, that it required a restraint; wherefore the
Sovereign, by the unanimous Advice of the _Knights-Companions_,
Decreed, and Commanded, _That every one of the_ Knights-Companions _of
the_ Order, _should have to attend upon his Person at the yearly
Solemnization of the Feast of the_ Order, _fifty Persons, and no more_:
The reason whereof we find elsewhere noted to be, for saving of Charge,
and avoiding of Emulation. But in the beginning of King _Charles_ I.
Reign, of ever Blessed Memory, the gallantry of Attendants began again
to Increase and Augment; insomuch that at the Grand Feast held at
_White-Hall_, the 22d, 23d, and 24th of _April_, _Anno_ 8 _Car._ I. we
find it observed, that the _Knights-Companions_ came forth attended,
each with a Train of Servants very richly clad.

But to return and enter upon the Proceeding, to the end the Servants
and Attendants of the _Knights-Companions_ may be exactly Marshalled,
the Usher of the Hall (whose Duty it is to rank them) ought to call
for a List from _Garter_, of such _Knights-Companions_ as are to be
present at the Grand Feast, noted with their several Places in the
Proceeding, for his better Directions in assigning the Attendants
their due Places, the Order whereof is thus: First, the _Junior_
Knights-Attendants proceed one before another, on the left Hand, upon
whose right Hand the second eldest Knights-Attendants go in equal
Rank with them, for this we observe to have been the general rule;
where the _Knights-Companions_ Proceed in pairs, their Attendants go
together; those belonging to the _Senior_ Knights of the two, on the
right Hand, and to the _Junior_ upon their left; but the Order is
otherwise, where any of the _Knights-Companions_ proceed single and
alone, (which often falls out, as shall be noted in its due Place,)
for then the Attendants belonging to that single Knight go two and
two, on both sides the Way, opposite one against the other.

But when the Grand Feast is Celebrated at _White-Hall_, there the
_Knights-Companions_ Attendants are Marshalled by the said Usher, on
both sides the Passage, from the outward Door of the Guard Chamber,
down into the Hall, taking up all the Room as far as the old Chappel;
and because here they do not proceed, in regard of the shortness of the
Processional way, but only make a stand, for the Proceeding to pass
through them, they are ranked in a way different from that used at
_Windsor_; nevertheless relating more especially to the Order observed
by their Masters: Which Method, in the Sovereign’s Proceeding to the
Chappel, at the beforementioned Feast, held at _White-Hall_, _Anno_ 8
_Car._ I. we find thus described. The eldest _Knight-Companions_
Servants were ranked on the right Hand of the Passage, the chiefest of
them near unto the old Chappel Door; and the second Knight (being
Companion to the eldest) his Attendants stood on the left side, the
chiefest of them also next the said old Chappel Door, and in case the
eldest Knight’s Fellow or Companion be not present in this Proceeding,
then the eldest Knight’s Servants ought to be placed opposite one
against the other, upon each side the said old Chappel Door: The like
Order is to be taken in Marshalling the Servants of the other Knights
of this most Noble _Order_, whose Companions are then absent.

Secondly, The Order of Proceeding amongst the _Alms-Knights_, (who,
_Anno_ 1 _Car._ I. had two Waiters of the Sovereign’s Hall, in their
Livery Coats, bearing white Rods in their Hands, to proceed before
them,) is in general two and two together, the _Junior_ is placed
foremost on the left Hand, and his next _Senior_ on his right; and if
Sickness, or other lawful Impediment, chance to hinder one or more of
them, from going in the Proceeding, his _Junior_ is advanc’d into his
Place, and consequently all the other _Juniors_ do in like manner alter
their Places, and advance, to the end the superior Place be still
supplied, according to the right rule of Marshalling the Singles, that
compose a gross Body; but in this Case, if the Number that attend
happen to be odd, the Governor of the _Alms-Knights_ goes last of all,
and alone.

Thirdly, The Virger of the College hath his Place next after the
_Alms-Knights_, and immediately before the _Prebends_ of the College;
who being habited in a Gown, beareth a Silver Verge, the Ensign of his
Office: Nevertheless, heretofore, when the _Prebends_ went not in the
Proceeding, on the Eve of the Grand Feast, the Virger proceeded first
of all, before the _Alms-Knights_, for so it was observed on the Eve of
St. _George_, at _Windsor_, _Anno_ 6 _Eliz._ and in this manner we see
it exprest, in the Proceeding set forth by _Marcus Gerchard_.

Fourthly, Under the general rule, relating to the _Alms-Knights_, are
comprehended the _Prebends_ of the College, the _Pursuivants_,
_Heralds_, and _Provincial Kings_, insomuch, that where either of the
said Kings are absent, the _Senior Herald_ is advanced, and goes in
breast on the left Hand of him who is then present; so also where any
of the _Heralds_ are wanting, his next _Junior_ ascendeth into his
Place; whereby it sometimes falls out, that the _Senior Pursuivant_ is
joined to the left Hand of the _Junior Herald_: And through their
defects and absence, the Number of the Officers of Arms be odd, then
(with this difference in the foresaid rule observed among the
_Alms-Knights_,) the youngest _Pursuivant_ goeth single by himself.

Touching the right of Precedency, between the Officers of Arms, and
_Prebends_ of the College, in Proceeding before the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_, we find there hath been heretofore not only some
Question started, but the Place contended for; insomuch, that at the
Installation of the Earls of _Shrewsbury_ and _Cumberland_, _Anno_ 34
_Eliz._ the _Prebends_ took Place, and upon the 24th of _May, Anno_ 39
_Eliz._ at the Installation of _Thomas_, Lord _Howard_ of _Walden_, and
others, the _Prebends_ again endeavoured to pass between the Officers
of Arms, and Officers of the _Order_; but _Charles_, Lord _Howard_ of
_Effingham_, then Lieutenant to the Sovereign, delivered his Opinion on
the behalf of the Officers of Arms against the _Prebends_.

Yet did not this so settle the _Order_ of Precedency, or quiet the
_Prebends_, but that the Contention again broke out, _Anno_ 1 _Jac._ I.
at the Installation of the Earls of _Pembrook_, _Marr_, _Southampton_,
and Duke of _Lenox_; (which happened on the ninth, not second of
_July_, in the foresaid Year,) even to such a heighth, that the
_Prebends_, _Pursuivants_, and _Heralds_, contended in the Proceeding;
but the Controversy was on the next Morning composed, by the Lord
Admiral, (then the Sovereign’s Lieutenant,) the Lord Treasurer, and the
Earl of _Worcester_; and the _Order_ in Proceeding thus settled: first,
That the _Alms-Knights_ should go foremost, the _Pursuivants_ next,
then the _Prebends_, and then the _Heralds_ and Kings of Arms; and this
Order in Proceeding was afterwards observed, on the 21 _May, Anno_ 4
_Jac._ I. at the Installation of the Earl of _Salisbury_, and Viscount
_Bindon_; as also the 19 _May, Anno_ 6. of the same King, at the
Installation of the Earls of _Dunbar_, and _Montgomery_.

Howbeit, _Anno_ 9 _Jac._ I. and so afterwards, we do not find the
_Pursuivants_ mentioned in the Proceeding, by particular Name, nor
otherwise, than in this following Order, _viz._ _Alms-Knights_,
_Prebends_, _Heralds_, &c. but it may be presumed that the
_Pursuivants_, then joined again in Body with the _Heralds_, (though
for some Years before divided from them, by the interposition of the
_Prebends_,) as well as the Provincial Kings, and all of them under the
Title of _Heralds_, and sometimes Officers of Arms.

And though at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation, on Sunday the 14th
of _September_, in the said fifteenth Year of King _James_, it is
noted, that the Prince (being then the Sovereign’s Lieutenant,)
proceeded to Morning Service on the Feast Day, with the _Alms-Knights_,
_Heralds_, _Prebends_, and Officers of the _Order_ before him; from
which manner of Expression, it may perchance be supposed, that the
_Heralds_ went at that time next after the _Alms-Knights_, and before
the _Prebends_; nevertheless, elsewhere we find them, on the Eve of the
aforesaid Feast, ranked in this following Order.

                    The Alms-Knights.
                    The Prebends.
                    The Officers of Arms.
                    The Knights of the Order, _&c._

And doubtless, they proceeded in the same Order to the Chappel, on the
next Morning, notwithstanding what is before said to the contrary,
those Expressions being interwoven with the general Account given of
the Ceremonies of the whole Festival, and more subject to mistake,
where the relation of the Proceeding is carried on in a continued
Discourse, than were ranked (as is before exhibited,) in particular
Lines, and in the Order and Form of a Proceeding. Besides, we no where
meet with any Order or Decree, nulling the foresaid Determination, made
_Anno_ 1 _Jac._ I. which placeth the _Prebends_ before the _Heralds_.
Finally, to give an end to the Disputes in this Point, we find, that
upon the Eve of this Feast, held at _Windsor_, the 23, 24, and 25 of
_November_, _Anno_ 1 _Car._ I. the _Prebends_ proceeded next before the
_Pursuivants_, and the _Pursuivants_ immediately before the _Heralds_
and Provincial Kings; that is to say, all the Officers of Arms (except
_Garter_, whose Place is elsewhere,) proceeded in one entire Body
together, which Order we find to be the same in all Proceedings after,
that we have met with, and was so observed at the Grand Feast held at
_Windsor_, _Anno_ 13 _Car._ II. and ever since. But to proceed.

All the before mentioned Attendants wait in their several Stations,
till the Hour of _Tierce_, when the Sovereign (having the
_Knights-Companions_ and Officers of the _Order_ before him, and his
Train carried up,) passeth towards the Presence Chamber, notice of
whose coming being given, the Band of Pensioners make the accustomed
Guard and Passage along the Presence Chamber, the _Seniors_ standing
towards the Lobby Door, within which Guard, on the other side, the
Officers of Arms place themselves: Upon the same warning, the Yeomen of
the Guard clear a like Passage from the Presence Chamber Door, along
the Guard Chamber, unto its outward Door, for the Proceeding to pass
through.

At the Sovereign’s approach, one of the Gentlemen Ushers attended with
the Sword of State, (the Point resting upon the Ground,) delivereth to
such one of the Nobility, (not being a Knight of the _Order_,) whom the
Sovereign, as an honorary Favour, hath before nominated, to bear it
from thence, before him in all the Proceedings of the Feast; during
which Action, the _Knights-Companions_ proceed forwards, and being
entred the Presence Chamber, Flank on each side the State, with some
small distance between them, and there make a stand: The Sovereign
being also entred, passeth to the Step before the State, (the Nobleman
who beareth the Sword, and the five Officers of the _Order_, retiring a
little on his right Hand,) and then turning himself towards the
_Knights-Companions_, standeth there a while, until they have made
their Reverences unto him; which being performed, he resaluteth the
_Knights-Companions_ by putting off his Cap: This done, the Sovereign
putteth his Cap on again; whereupon every of the _Knights Companions_
putteth on theirs, and immediately Rank themselves, according to their
due Place, on both sides the State.

For the right understanding whereof, we are in the fifth place to Note,
that in the Order and Method wherein the _Knights-Companions_ are
ranked, (if they be all present,) is two and two together, the _Junior_
foremost on the left Hand, for that is his Place in all Proceedings;
but where any of them be absent, the rule is different from that
appropriate to the before-mentioned Degrees; for though it be recorded,
that upon the Eve of the Grand Feast held at _Windsor_, _Anno_ 7 _Hen._
V. the _Knights-Companions_ went in Order to the _Chapter-House_ and
_Choir_; yet this being exprest but in general terms, how it ought to
be understood, will more fully appear, from the particular Directions
given for the Order of the _Knights-Companions_ Proceeding in King
_Henry_ VIII’s Statutes; where the Law directs each _Knight-Companion_
to proceed alone, at such time as his Fellow (who possesseth the Stall
opposite unto him) is absent, but the Order of such Proceeding will by
a Scheme be made more evident.


   _The Proceeding of the_ Knights-Companions, _present on the Eve of
        St._ George, _to the Closet at_ White-Hall, Anno 3 Eliz.

        The Lord _Hunsdon_.       Void.
        The Lord _Robert Dudley_. The Viscount _Mountague_.
        The Lord _Loughborow_.    The Earl of _Shrewsbury_.
        The Earl of _Sussex_.     The Lord _Howard_ of _Effing._
        Void.                     The Earl of _Westmorland_.
        The Marquiss of _North._  Void.
        The Lord _Clynton_.       The Duke of _Norfolk_.
        Void.                     The Earl of _Pembrook_.


Thus four _Knights-Companions_ proceeded alone, in regard the Stalls
opposite to them were void, the three first being absent, and the last
void by the Death of the Earl of _Huntington_; and to avoid all
disputes in relation to Precedency, King _Henry_ VIII. Decreed, in the
sixteenth Year of his Reign; _That each_ Knight-Companion _should take
Place, in Procession, Station, or sitting at the Table, thence forward,
as he had his Seat or Stall in the Choir, and not according to the
Degree of his Birth or Condition, unless the Sovereign was pleased that
any should be made Choice of, according to the Nobility of his Family,
to sit at the end of his own Table, or perform any other thing by the
by_.

The Proceeding among the Officers of the _Order_ differeth from all
before spoken of; for, being five in Number, the three inferior
Officers (when all present,) March in a breast, and (of later Times,)
the _Register_ in the middle, _Garter_ on his right Hand, and the
_Usher_ of the _Black-Rod_ on his left.

After these three Officers, the two superior proceed together, the
_Prelate_ on the Right, and the _Chancellor_ on the left; and after,
the Officers of the _Order_ follow the Sword, which is carried
immediately before the Sovereign. In the beginning of Queen
_Elizabeth_’s Reign, it was born by some of the Barons, but of later
Times it hath been conferr’d on Persons of higher Rank, as _Anno_ 4
_Car._ I. on the Earl of _Dover_; _Anno_ 9 _Car._ I. on the Earl of
_Danby_; and _Anno_ 13 _Car._ II. on the Lord Viscount _Mordant_, then
Constable of the Castle of _Windsor_; and at this Time ’tis usually
born by none under the Degree of an Earl.

The Sovereign’s Place in the Proceeding, _& notandum quod superior
Ordinis tempore Processionis in dicta Capella transibit retro totam
Sociarum Comitivam_; which though the _Statute_ mentions here to be
performed at the Grand Procession, yet it refers to all those times the
Sovereign proceeds to, or from, no less than within the Chappel. In
ancient Time, the Sovereign (if he were at _Windsor_, to celebrate the
Grand Feast,) proceeded to the Chappel in Person, as well on the Eve,
as on the Feast Day. Queen _Elizabeth_ being the first who went not to
the Chappel on the Eve of the Feast, unless we except King _Henry_ VI.
who, by reason of Sickness, was necessitated to make a Deputy in his
stead: The aforesaid Omission of Queen _Elizabeth_, was first
occasioned through Indisposition of Health, though she afterwards,
without that necessity, did not comply, as in the 18, 25, 29, and 31
Years of her Reign, which gave occasion to King _James_ to make
Deputies at those three Grand Feasts he Celebrated at _Windsor_; and
the like did King _Charles_ I. in the first Year of his Reign; but in
the fourth Year of his Reign, the ancient Custom (for many Years
intermitted,) was restored, and the Sovereign (making no Lieutenant,)
proceeded to the Chappel, not only on that Eve, but always observed it
afterwards, as did King _Charles_ II. in all the Grand Feasts he held,
and is now observed.

It will be necessary to take notice, that the Proceeding begins from
the Presence Chamber, call’d in the _Statutes_ the Great Chamber; a
Scheme whereof, on the Eve of the Grand Feast, is here exhibited.


               The Attendants on the Knights-Companions.
               Alms-Knights.
               Virger of the Chappel.
               Prebends of _Windsor_.
               Officers of Arms.
               Knights-Companions.
               Black-Rod.
               Register.
               Garter.
               Chancellor.
               Prelate.
               The Sword.
               The Sovereign.
               Train-bearers.
               Captain of the Pensioners.
               Pensioners.


To the foregoing Proceeding have been occasionally receiv’d some
Persons of Quality, and others Eminent in Place and Degree; (though
their Offices do not particularly relate to this most Noble _Order_,)
but are admitted by reason of their requisite Attendance on the
Sovereign, in his Proceedings on all Occasions.

On St. _George_’s _Eve_, _Anno_ 3 _Eliz._ the old Ambassador of
_Sweden_, accompanied by the Earl of _Hertford_, went in the Proceeding
to the Closet at _White-Hall_, next after the Train-bearers, and
immediately before the Ladies Attendants on the Sovereign; and the next
Morning, when the Sovereign proceeded to the Chappel, the new
Ambassador of _Sweden_ went in the same Place.

As to those admitted on the Account of their Offices, is the Lord
Chamberlain, (though not a Knight of the _Garter_,) and is allowed
Place somewhat behind, on the right Hand of the Sovereign, and the Vice
Chamberlain on the left.

The Dean of the Sovereign’s Chappel at _White-Hall_ attends when the
Proceedings are thither, going a little behind the Sovereign towards
his left Hand; next goes the Clerk of the Closet, then the Master of
the Robes, as also one of the Masters of Requests, and then the
Gentlemen of the Robes.


               _Of the Proceeding to the_ Chapter-House.

§ 3. Having under the precedent Head, treated at large of the Rank and
Place of all those that pass in the Proceeding, wherein all are
Bare-headed, except the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_: I now come
to the Place whither the Proceeding is directed.

The first Solemn Action on the Entrance of the Grand Feast, which the
Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ are obliged to perform, is to
Celebrate a _Chapter_, to which end it hath been most usual for them to
proceed from the Presence Chamber, _every one in their due Place and
Order_; first to the _Chapter-House_, to consult of things of course;
and next into the _Choir_, to hear Divine Service; which has been the
constant Custom from the Reign of King _Henry_ V. as many Examples,
recorded in the Registers of the _Order_, evidence.

As this Custom of holding a _Chapter_ on the Eve of the Grand Feast,
was constantly observed when celebrated without Prorogation; so also
hath a _Chapter_ been in like manner held before _Vespers_, on the Eve,
at such time as the Feast Day of St. _George_ only hath been observ’d,
when (for any cause) the Anniversary of the Grand Feast receiv’d
Prorogation: As for Instance, _Anno_ 1 _Mary_, a _Chapter_ was held at
the Mannor of St. _James_’s, on the _Vigil_ of St. _George_, before the
first _Vespers_; whereunto is fixt this Note, _ut moris est_; and the
Grand Feast for that Year receiv’d Adjournment, until the coming of
_Philip_, then Prince (after King) of _Spain_.

In like manner, though the Celebration of the Grand Feasts were removed
from _Windsor_, and observed at other Places, yet this usual Custom of
holding a _Chapter_ on the Eve, was always practised; after which the
proceeding to Evening Prayer succeeded, as is manifest by several
Testimonies from the _Registers_.

The publick processional way to the _Chapter-House_ at _Windsor_, used
Time out of Mind, led from the Presence Chamber through the Cloister,
and the great Gate of the King’s Lodging, to the upper Ward of the
Castle, thence through the middle Ward, and part of the lower, to and
through the Passage, between the East End of the Chappel and
_Tomb-House_; and thence into the _Chapter-House_, Situate on the North
East Corner of St. _George_’s _Chappel_.

But the Sovereign hath sometimes thought fit to wave this publick
processional way, and pass along the private way, which leads from the
King’s Privy Chamber, down the Stairs into the Terrace, _viz._ through
that stately Walk lying on the North side of the Castle, and entring
again at a Door, heretofore made through a part of the Castle Wall into
one of the Canons Lodgings, adjoining to _Winchester Tower_, (now made
up) went thence through the Cloisters, proceeding in the Order before
shewed.

We shall close this Head, with observing, that though the Proceedings
to the _Chapter-House_ or Chappel, on the Eve of the Feast, have most
commonly been on Foot; yet have they been also on Horse-back, on
extraordinary Occasions, as _Anno_ 3 _Hen._ VII. at which Time several
Ambassadors being arrived here from Foreign Kings and Princes, they and
many of the Nobility of this Kingdom, with the King’s Council, the two
Archbishops, the Bishops of _Lincoln_ and _Ely_, and the Chief Justice
of the King’s Bench, repaired also thither; and on the Eve, the
Sovereign, accompanied with the _Knights-Companions_, rode from the
upper Quadrangle down to the College. The Queen and the King’s Mother
rode in a Chair, covered with rich Cloth of Gold, drawn by six Coursers
finely Harnass’d, and twenty one Ladies, habited in Crimson Velvet,
rode on white Palfries: Sir _Roger Cotton_, Master of the Queen’s
Horse, led her Horse of State, whereon was a Saddle of Cloth of Gold,
and three Crowns of Silver gilt; as soon as they alighted, the
Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ proceeded to the _Chapter-House_,
and thence to Evening Song, which ended, they return’d in the Order
they came.

King _Henry_ VIII. in the eleventh Year of his Reign, at three a Clock
in the Afternoon, with all the _Knights-Companions_, in the Habit of
the _Order_, proceeded from the Presence Chamber in _Windsor-Castle_,
till they came to the Quadrangle, where they took their Horses, and
rode according to their Stalls, not according to their Estate, next
before the King, and thence rode to the middle Door of the Chappel, and
there alighted, and proceeded without the _Choir_ to the
_Chapter-House_; there are other Examples, but these may suffice.


                    _Of the opening of the_ Chapter.

§ 4. The Proceeding being arriv’d at the Entrance into the Chappel,
first the Attendants on the _Knights-Companions_ divide themselves as
they enter, beginning at the outward Door, and Flank on each side the
North Isle of the Chappel, and so toward the West Door of the
_Choir_, making a stand along the Isle for the _Alms-Knights_,
_Virgers_, _Prebends_, and _Officers_ of _Arms_, to pass through
them, who go on towards the said West Door; and when the _Junior
Knights-Companions_ are entred into the Chappel, the Proceeding makes
a stand, while all the _Knights-Companions_ following turn aside on
the right Hand into the _Chapter-House_, next the Officers of the
_Order_, and lastly the Sovereign; but the Nobleman that carries the
Sword, the Train-bearers, Pensioners, _&c._ stay without the
_Chapter-House_ Door in the North Isle; none being admitted in but
the Sovereign, the _Knights-Companions_, and the Officers of the
_Order_; who being all entred, the Door is shut by the Gentleman
Usher of the _Black-Rod_, and every Person severally takes his due
Place and Station, whereupon the _Chapter_ immediately opens.

In what Manner and Order the Sovereign, _Knights-Companions_, and
Officers of the _Order_, are ranked, at the holding of a _Chapter_, is
describ’d, _Anno_ 11 _Hen._ VIII. when the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_ consulted in the _Chapter-House_, on the
Reformation and Explanation of the _Statutes_ of the _Order_.

The Sovereign, on his Entrance, proceeded to the midst of the North-end
of the Table; the _Knights-Companions_, whose Stalls in the _Choir_
were on the Sovereign’s side, took the right Hand of the Table, and
those of the Princes side the left; then the Prelate of the _Order_
came and stood on the Sovereign’s right Hand, at the corner of the
Table; _Register_ and _Garter_ were at the lower end, and _Black-Rod_
kept the _Chapter-House_ Door on the inside. The Chancellor of the
_Order_ is not there mention’d, (as not being present) yet his Place is
on the Sovereign’s left Hand of the Table.

If the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ arrive at the _Chapter-House_
so late, that the Business necessary to be done cannot be discuss’d,
without putting off the Celebration of _Vespers_, beyond the Canonical
Hour; it hath been usual to adjourn the Debates till the next Morning,
as was done _Anno_ 14 _Car._ I.


        _Transactions in the_ Chapter _held before the_ Vespers.

§ 5. When the _Chapter_ held before the _Vespers_ is opened, and no
Adjournment given thereto, all things are then to be provided for,
which concern the Honour and Dignity of this most Noble _Order_.

The matters of course are; first, Swearing, and admitting Officers;
secondly, Debating about the _Knights-Companions_ then absent, and
either dispensing with, or inflicting Penalties on them; and thirdly,
Constituting or appointing an Officer, to carry on the State and
Solemnity of the Feast in the Sovereign’s absence. But other
Particulars that are occasional, cannot so well be brought within Rule,
as being wholly accidental.

As to the first, the Officers of the _Order_, soon after the _Chapter_
is open’d, take their respective Oaths, in Order to perform the Duty of
their several Places, during the Session of the _Chapter_, and
thenceforward, as is evident from several Examples, but one may
suffice, from a _Chapter_ held at _Windsor_, _Anno_ 4 _Car._ I. whereat
Dr. _Neal_, Bishop of _Winchester_, was Sworn Prelate; Sir _Francis
Crane_, Chancellor; and Dr. _Mathew Wren_, Bishop of _Ely_, Register.

It hath sometimes happened, that some of the Officers of this _Order_
have been Sworn at other Times, as at _Chapters_ next ensuing their
Nomination and Choice, wherein the Administration of the Oath is one of
the first things done.

Touching the second particular debated in _Chapter_, _viz._ the
dispensing with, or punishing absent Knights; it is to be considered,
that the _Statutes_ of the _Order_ enjoin all the _Knights-Companions_
to be present at the Celebration of the Grand Feast: that is, those
that are within the Kingdom, or elsewhere; although the Service of St.
_George_, according to the Rites of the Church, be not celebrated, as
on the Service of the Day whereon that of St. _George_ has fallen,
_viz._ _Good-Friday_: But with this Limitation, _so that they be in a
capacity, or may conveniently repair thither_.

Therefore the next thing usually entred upon in the _Chapter_, is the
Sovereign’s and _Knights-Companions_ taking notice, whether any of the
Fellowship make default of coming at the Hour assign’d; and if so, they
are considered under one of these Heads. First, Stranger Princes;
Secondly, Late Commissioners who are arrived, or every Minute expected;
and Thirdly, Such as have given notice that they cannot be present,
during the continuation of the Feast: Of these Excuses of course,
verbal Apologies, or Letters of Excuse, are, or may be, offered; and in
case they are approved or admitted, then the Penance, which by the
_Statutes_ ought otherwise to be inflicted, is admitted; all which
ought to be recorded.

Stranger Princes are excused in course, on Account of their necessary
Residence in their own Territories; and of their Excuses and accustom’d
Dispensations, are divers Instances in the Registers of the _Order_.

As to _Knights-Companions_, who are tardy in their Journey, or being
come to the Castle, fall short of the Hour, or of attending the
Sovereign to the _Chapter-House_, either through negligence, or want of
timely notice, or other accident; the _Statutes_ enjoin for Penance,
that they be not permitted for that time to enter into the _Chapter_,
but tarry without the Door, and not have Voice in any thing that shall
happen to be done there, unless they can alledge a just Excuse, or
render such a sufficient cause as the Sovereign, or his Deputy, shall
approve of; but few defaulters have been noted of this kind.

The third sort of Delinquents, are those _Knights-Companions_ absent,
not only at the Hour of _Tierce_, but are likely to be so during the
whole Feast; the Proceedings relating to them, are either upon what is
offered in Excuse of their absence, or determined on their neglect of
making Apology for it.

Excuses for absence, are either by Letters or Word of Mouth; if by
Letters, they are directed to the Chancellor of the _Order_; or else
the Sovereign sends to his Lieutenant on their behalf, and both are
produc’d by the Chancellor: But if Excuse be made by Word of Mouth,
then are they delivered by the Sovereign himself; or on motion made by
some of the _Knights-Companions_ present in _Chapter_.

The Custom of sending Letters has been very ancient: The Lord _Powis_’s
Letter, under his Hand and Seal, (certifying his Indisposition of
Body,) was produc’d in _Chapter_, _Anno_ 8 _Hen._ V. And the following
Year the Dukes of _York_, _Norfolk_, and _Buckingham_, with the Earls
of _Salisbury_, _Shrewsbury_, and _Pembrook_, Viscount _Bourchier_, the
Lord _Rivers_, and Sir _John Falstaff_; being all absent from St.
_George_’s _Feast_, _they declared the reason of their absence by their
Messengers_. There are many Precedents of this kind, and of Letters
sent from the Sovereign, directed to his Lieutenant, to accept of
_Knights-Companions_ Excuses, whose absence he had beforehand dispenc’d
with; we observe those Dispensations excus’d not the sending their own
particular Excuses; for it is evident they were also expected, and that
such allowance of absence was not Absolute, the Clause running thus:
_That you [the Sovereign’s Deputy] allow these Excuses so far as are
consonant to reason_. And in all other Letters of the same nature, a
Clause to this Effect hath been inferred: _That as the Sovereign
thought good to advertise his Deputy, that for certain Causes he had
dispenc’d with their Attendance for that time; so he will’d him to
accept their reasonable Excuses in that behalf accordingly_.

Secondly, The absent _Knights-Companions_ have had their Excuses
frequently made by Word of Mouth, either of the Sovereign, or some
other of the _Knights-Companions_, present in the _Chapter_. This
Favour is done either by the Sovereign himself, if present; or by his
Order to the Lieutenant, in his absence.

There have been many Examples of what hath been done in this Case, and
also when the Sovereign hath not been present in _Chapter_, but hath
beforehand verbally given his Deputy or Lieutenant direction to excuse
the absence of several _Knights-Companions_.

It will be necessary to observe what Effect the Excuses have usually
produc’d; whereinto we find the just and reasonable favourably
admitted, some suspended, and divers disallowed. Those easily allow’d
were, first, Sickness; (for those of the _Knights-Companions_ who have
been either Sick, far spent with Age, or intent on publick Affairs,
have been readily allow’d,) Secondly, The not recovery of Wounds
receiv’d in the publick Service; as we meet with in the Case of Sir
_William Harington_, _Anno_ 7 _Hen._ V. whom we see excus’d _for his
Illness, occasion’d from his Wounds then lately receiv’d at the Siege
of_ Rohan, _and elsewhere_. Thirdly, Impotency and old Age. Fourthly,
Imployment in the Sovereign’s Service, either Abroad or at Home; those
Abroad are necessarily excus’d, those at Home we shall be more
particular to. The Earl of _Shrewsbury_, _Anno_ 22 _Eliz._ was taken up
in certain Affairs, enjoin’d him by the Sovereign; the Earl of
_Huntington_, 26 _Eliz._ being President of the Council of the North,
his absence was for that, and several Years following, favourably
excus’d; and a like Case was that of the Earl of _Danby_, _Anno_ 13
_Car._ I. who for his necessary Attendance at the Seat of Justice in
_Eyre_, was excus’d waiting on the Sovereign at the Grand Feast that
Year. Fifthly, _When the Grand Feast hath receiv’d Prorogation, and any
of the_ Knights-Companions _have not had notice of the Day whereunto it
was prorogued_. Sixthly, _When any of them have been in Captivity_; as
was _Thomas_, Earl of _Salisbury_, and the Earl of _Huntington_, both
Prisoners in _France_, _Anno_ 2 _Hen._ VI. Seventhly, When any of them
have obtain’d the Sovereign’s Letters of Dispensation, of which
sufficient is spoken before. Lastly, _Some other just and lawful
Occasion_, as well as Accident, having fallen out; (not relating to
those under the former Heads,) the Sovereign, on Information given in
_Chapter_, hath been pleas’d to allow of; as in the Case of the Lord
_Fauconbridge_, _Anno_ 32 _Hen._ VI. was readily admitted, on his
pleading _the care of his Domestick Affairs, he having been lately in
Prison, and had obtained leave to go and see his House and Lands in the
Country_. The Earl of _Arundel_’s absence, _Anno_ 15 _Car._ I. was
pardon’d, by reason of the Dutchess of _Richmond_’s Death, who died on
the Eve of the Grand Feast; that so he (being the chief of her Family,)
might be at Hand to advise and assist in all things conducing to the
Honour of the deceased Dutchess.

And as the _Knights-Companions_ have been often excus’d for not
appearing on the Grand Feast, so hath the Sovereign, on sufficient
Grounds, been pleas’d to license and dispence with their departure;
from the same of this is an Example, 6 _Eliz._ when the Lord _Hastings_
of _Loughborough_, falling Ill a little before the Offering on St.
_George_’s _Day_, obtain’d Licence from the Sovereign to depart out of
the _Choir_; and came no more abroad that Day, nor during the Feast. As
also another in the Duke of _Lenox_, _Anno_ 15 _Car._ I. _The Deputy
Chancellor having, by Command of the Sovereign, and in discharge of the
Duty of his Office_; who being forc’d to go back to _London_, by reason
of the aforesaid Dutchess of _Richmond_’s Death, had his Excuse, and
the Sovereign’s Licence for departure.

We are next to consider Excuses, which, though sent in due time, yet on
Debate in _Chapter_ were suspended rather than allow’d; to which Head
may be referr’d that Case of several of the _Knights-Companions_, who
were Members of the Lord’s House in the long Parliament. For _Anno_ 18
_Car._ I. the Deputy Chancellor having, by the Command of the
Sovereign, and in discharge of the Duty of his Office, sent to each of
them a Summons, for their Attendance at the Celebration of the Grand
Feast, to be held for the preceeding Year at _York_; and notice thereof
being given to the House of Lords, they immediately made the ensuing
Order.


                       Die Martis 22 Maii, 1641.

_Whereas the Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty’s Houshould, and some
other Lords of Parliament, Knights of the_ Garter, _have been Summoned
to give their Attendance, and repair into the City of_ York, _for the
Celebration of St._ George’_s Feast; who acquainting this House with
the Summons aforesaid, it is this Day ordered by the Lords in
Parliament, that they attend the weighty Affairs of the Kingdom
discussed in Parliament, whereunto they are obliged by his Majesty’s
Writ, and the Law of the Land._

                                         Jo. Browne, Cleric. Parliament.


Whereupon the said _Knights-Companions_, before the Days appointed by
Prorogation for holding the Feast, sent their petitionary Letters of
Excuse to the Deputy Chancellor, wherein they profess’d their desire
and readiness to attend, in Obedience of the said Summons; nevertheless
pleaded the foresaid _Order_ for the Ground of their stay in _London_,
and therefore desired him to obtain for them the Sovereign’s
Dispensation: On producing the said Letters in _Chapter_, the Sovereign
would not at that time either admit or disallow of their Excuses, but
referr’d the consideration to the next _Chapter_, to be held by
Prorogation.

Of Excuses which have not been allow’d, the most remarkable is that of
the Duke of _Norfolk_, and the Lord _Scales_, _Anno_ 36 _Hen._ VI. who
were adjudg’d to the Penalty of the Statute, in regard the Causes
alledged to excuse their absence were not approved; the latter was
signed by the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_, in a Jewel to the
value of twenty Marks, to be offered in the College; whereby the rigour
of the _Statutes_ appears to have been more strictly executed on him,
than the Duke, probably because the Lord _Scales_ was absent the Year
before, and no cause thereof shewed to the _Chapter_.

In relation to the Proceedings on the absent _Knights-Companions_
neglect of sending their Excuses, we shall observe, that some of them
have with difficulty been remitted, some left in suspence, and others
sentenc’d, and referr’d either to the Sovereign’s pleasure, or the
Punishment assign’d by Law; of the first kind we find that the Earl of
_Westmorland_, _Anno_ 10 _Hen._ V. though not very well, yet had much
ado to be excus’d, because he signified not the Cause of his absence,
as the _Statutes_ required. So _Anno_ 12 _Car._ I. the Earls of _Derby_
and _Kelly_, having made no Excuse, were for that Omission blameable,
but by the Grace of the Sovereign for that time pardon’d.

As to those who, through the indulgence of the Sovereign, (where
probable cause hath induc’d it,) have not had Sentence pass’d on them
presently, but were deferr’d in expectation of some satisfactory Cause
to be shewed; we find in the Case of the Prince, the Duke of
_Buckingham_, and five other _Knights-Companions_ absent from the
Feast, held _Anno_ 18 _Hen._ VII. wherein it is registred, that _no
cause of Excuse was shewed, but there was an expectation of one to be
alledged_.

But as for those of the third sort, on whom Sentence hath pass’d; they
have been left either to the pleasure of the Sovereign, or to those
Penalties which the Law of this _Order_ inflict; of which, as also of
those on whom Judgment hath pass’d, are divers Instances.

Besides these Grounds of assigning Penances, there are other Causes set
down in the before recited ninth Article, of the _Statutes_ of
Institution for Penances; as when the _Knights Companions_ are absent
at other times, beside the Hour of _Tierce_, that is, the beginning of
the first _Vespers_. Secondly, At the beginning of the Morning Service
on the Feast Day. Thirdly, At the beginning of the second _Vespers_.
Fourthly, During the whole Feast. And, Fifthly, at the Grand Feast next
following.

For the first, admitting any _Knight-Companion_ hath failed of meeting
and attending on the Sovereign at the Hour of _Tierce_, and thereupon
suffered the Punishment of Non-admittance into the _Chapter-House_, and
deprivation of Vote; nevertheless if at the rising of the said
_Chapter_, he be not ready to proceed with the Sovereign, and other the
_Knights-Companions_, into the _Choir_, to the beginning of the first
_Vespers_; he ought not only to suffer the former, but this additional
Penalty, that he shall not presume to Enter into his Stall at that
time, but tarry in that part of the _Choir_, where the Taper-bearers
are wont to stand; nevertheless before his own Stall, until the holy
Offices be ended; and the Law of the _Order_ is the same in King
_Henry_ V’s, and King _Henry_ VIII’s _Statutes_, only render the Place
for the Delinquent Knight to stand in, to be before the Stalls in the
Choiristers Places; and now how the Penalty hath been inflicted, upon
breach of the Law in this particular, we shall see by the following
Instances.

At the Grand Feast celebrated at _Windsor_, _An._ 21 _H._ VII. when it
seems the Lord _Kildare_, Sir _Gilbert Talbot_, and Sir _Richard
Goulford_, came late to the Chappel, we find this Memorandum fixt to
their Names; they stood without, (before their Stalls) by the
Sovereign’s Permission, or rather Command: But yet this is not all the
Punishment which hath been inflicted upon the _Knights-Companions_ for
this Offence; (though it be all that is set down in the foresaid
Article,) for _Anno_ 25 _Hen._ VI. upon the Eve of St. _George_, the
Marquiss of _Dorset_ not coming to the first _Vespers_, and being
convicted of his late coming, was prohibited joining in the Nomination
then made, for the Election of the King of _Portugal_, into the room of
the Duke of _Gloucester_.

Offenders in the second and third Case, being such as neglect to come
before the beginning of the high Mass, or the second _Vespers_, called
also the _Vespers_ on St. _George_’s _Day_, have the like Punishment
with the former assigned them, throughout all the Bodies of the
_Statutes_; _viz._ Exclusion from their Stalls, and Station in the
Choiristers Range.

_Anno_ 1 _Hen._ VI. We observe the Lord _Willoughby_ noted to be absent
upon the Eve of the Grand Feast, but present on the Day; and
consequently he incurred no further Penance than what his absence on
the Eve drew on him; the Earl of _Derby_, _Anno_ 18 _Eliz._ coming too
late to the first Morning Service on the Feast Day, did for some short
time undergo the same Penance, but soon after, upon Dispensation from
the Lieutenant, went up to his Stall.

There are several other Instances; and besides the aforesaid Defaults,
he is likewise to undergo the same Penalties, when the Grand Feast is
prorogued, or celebrated at any other Place than _Windsor_.

But if he offend in all, and have no reasonable or allowable Excuse for
his absence, he is then prohibited entering his Stall at the next
Feast, and to pay ten Pounds, to be employed towards the Ornaments of
the College; and sometimes the former Penance has been inflicted for
late coming to Divine Service.

The fourth degree of Offence is yet greater than any, and the variety
of Penances are heightened. If a _Knight-Companion_ shall neglect
coming to the Grand Feast, and have no allowable reason; he shall not
at the Feast held the ensuing Year be permitted to enter his own Stall,
but stand below it; he shall walk alone by himself before three
Crosses, which, in ancient time, were born in the Grand Procession:
When the Grand Procession returns to the _Choir_, he shall stand in the
Place aforesaid, till the time of the Offertory; he shall Offer last by
himself, and then humbly approach the Stall of the Sovereign, or his
Deputy, and there desire Absolution. But there is no Instance that
these Rigours were put in Execution, though many have offended in this
kind.

Lastly, The _Statutes_ enjoin; That where a _Knight-Companion_ remains
within the Kingdom, and shall be Guilty of an Omission two Years
together, he ought to be so long interdicted his Stall, till he have
offered a Jewel at St. _George_’s _Altar_, to the Value of twenty
Marks; and thenceforward every Year in which he shall be guilty of the
same Omission, the Penalty to be doubled, till he is pardoned: The most
memorable Case in the Prosecution of a Contempt, was against the Earl
of _Arundel_, 14 _Edw._ IV. who for being absent two Years together,
was Mulct forty Marks; and continuing his Contempt the next Year, was
fined the Sum of eighty Marks.

Touching the Necessity, and Power, of the Sovereign’s constituting a
Deputy; it was provided for at the Institution of the _Order_; the
Sovereign being then engaged in the Wars of _France_, thought it
reasonable that Provision should be made by the _Statutes_, for to
depute some Person in his stead.

When therefore such Occasion happened, a Commission was made out to one
of the _Knights-Companions_, some reasonable time before the approach
of the Feast; so that none of the ancient Ceremonies might be omitted,
or any Impediment happen through his absence; and such Deputy hath
usually been one of the chief of the _Order_, in Authority, Eminence,
or Birth. The first so made was, _John_ Duke of _Bedford_, 7 _Hen._ V.
and the reason thereof given, in the _Registrum Chartaceum_, is,
because the Sovereign was then employed in the Wars in _Normandy_.

And though the Title given by the _Statutes_ to this Officer, be not
particularly mentioned in the _Blue-Book_, where it speaks of the said
Duke’s holding the Feast of St. _George_ that Year, but rather implied
in the Words _Regiæ Sublimatis locum implevit_; yet in the _Registrum
Chartaceum_ it is expresly set down, and the said Duke there styled,
_Depute de l’Ordre de Jaritiere_. Sometimes he has been styled,
_Deputatis Ordinis, & præses clarissimæ Ordinis_, &c.

About the beginning of the Reign of King _Henry_ VIII. the Title of
_Locum Tenens_, or Lieutenant, began to be taken up, and has, for the
most part, continued in all succeeding Times; and the other Titles of
Deputy, President, and Vicegerent, laid aside. As to the Business of
this Officer, sufficient has been said already. As an Essential
Honour to his Place, he has from ancient Time had some of the
_Knights-Companions_ assigned for his Assistants; the first mention
of which is in the _Registrum Chartaceum_, 8 _Hen._ VIII. The Number
of these Assistants were in those times uncertain; at the time
aforesaid they were 4. 21 _Hen._ VIII. 3. and 32 _Hen._ VIII. we find
but two; which Number has been a constant Rule ever since, except
once, _viz._ the last of _Hen._ VIII. They were always appointed in
_Chapter_, and have Letters of notice sent them thereof: But neither
the Lieutenant, nor Assistants, can be Chosen two Years together,
except the Sovereign should please to be present at the Day or Feast;
and after it was Decreed, 23 and 24 _Hen._ VIII. that this Indulgence
should extend to the term of three Years.

Lastly, We observe that this Officer always held the Feast at his
peculiar Cost and Charge; and gave liberal Rewards to _Garter_, and for
his Escutcheons, as also to the Officers of Arms, Gentlemen-Ushers,
Alms-Knights, and to all the several Waiters and Attendants employed in
the Ceremony.


            _The Ceremonies relating to the first_ Vespers.

§ 6. The first _Chapter_ held on the Eve of St. _George_ being
finished, the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ immediately proceed
from the _Chapter-House_ to the _Choir_, to hear _Vespers_. The
Officers of Arms, Prebends, and Alms-Knights, having attended in the
North-Isle of the Chappel, do now put themselves in Rank, and continue
the Proceeding from the _Chapter-House_ Door, along the said
North-Isle, to the West Door of the _Choir_; in like manner as they did
from the Presence Chamber, to the _Chapter-House_: The Organs then
beginning to play, and so continue till _Vespers_ begin.

When the Alms-Knights arrive at the West-Door, they first enter in a
whole Body, while the rest of the Proceeding makes a short stand, and
pass forward near the middle of the _Choir_, where they make a joint
and low Obeysance; next, all turning about by the left Hand, to the
Sovereign’s Seat; then still turning from the right, to the left Hand,
they ascend the _Haut Pas’s_, even to the Rails set before the _Altar_;
and forthwith divide themselves, flanking on each side, the _Juniors_
nearest the Rails.

This done, the Prebends enter in a Body also, and having made the like
Obeysances in the middle of the _Choir_, divide themselves, and take
their Seats; which, by King _Henry_ VIII’s _Statutes_, are appointed in
the lower range of Seats, between, but not in, the Stalls of the
_Knights-Companions_. While the Prebends are entering their Seats, the
Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings of Arms, in a Body, likewise
enter the _Choir_; and after due Reverence, pass up to the _Altar_, and
join the Alms-Knights; though anciently some difference was in this
Ceremony.

Afterwards, the two _Junior Knights-Companions_ enter, passing on till
they come near their own Stalls, and there make their Reverences, and
then divide, and take their stands directly before their Stalls; and so
of the rest of the _Knights-Companions_.

Next to the _Knights-Companions_, the _Black-Rod_, _Garter_, and
_Register_, enter in a Breast, who, proceeding to the middle of the
_Choir_, make their Obeysances, and then pass to their Form, placed on
the South-side of the _Choir_, before the Sovereign’s Stall, and stand
before it. After them, the Chancellor and Prelate in the like manner,
stand before their Form, placed near the Sovereign’s Seat: And for
these Forms, whereon the Officers of the _Order_ sit in the Chappel,
there is a special Decree for the allowance of them, entered at the end
of the Constitutions of their Offices.

Last of all the Sovereign enters, (having the Sword born before him,
but his Band of Pensioners stay at the _Choir_ Door, to keep off the
Crowd,) who, coming to the Steps which ascend the Royal Seat, makes a
Reverence toward the Altar, and then takes Place therein, before he
makes a second Reverence.

When the Lieutenant, in the Sovereign’s absence, proceeds to the first
_Vespers_; as soon as he enters the _Choir_, and comes near the
Sovereign’s Stall, he stands and makes a little pause there; then doing
his Reverences, after he has again stood a while, before he ascends his
own; where being arrived, he makes the double Reverence a second time,
and then sits down.

And now to placing the _Knights-Companions_ in their Stalls: _Garter_,
as soon as the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, is placed, makes again the
usual Reverence in the middle of the _Choir_; then turns to the
_Senior_ Knights, and doth his Reverence to each of them; whereupon, at
one Instant, they make their double Reverences below, where they stood,
and strait ascend at the first, or western Entrance, that goes to the
side Stalls; where being arrived, they make again their double
Reverences, and then seat themselves. But when the Sovereign’s
Lieutenant is present, each Knight adds a third Reverence to him, both
when they ascend to, and descend from, their Stalls; and so likewise do
all Persons, who pass in the Proceeding, add to their double Reverences
so often as there is occasion to make it, after such time as the
Lieutenant is entered his Stall; and so long as he continues therein,
both on the Eve, the Feast Day, and the Morrow after.

The _Knights-Companions_ being all seated, the Prelate and Chancellor
pass into the middle of the _Choir_, and having made double Reverences,
return to their Forms, and sit down. And after them, in the same
manner, the _Register_, _Garter_, and _Black-Rod_, proceed.

As to the Sovereign’s other Attendants, the Nobleman who carries the
Sword retires before the Sovereign’s Stall, a little on the right Hand;
and the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, if not a Knight of the
_Garter_, and the Vice Chamberlain, on the left, till the Sovereign
give them leave to sit down. The Clerk of the Closet stands at the
Sovereign’s right Hand, but the young Noblemen, that carry up the
Sovereign, and the Gentleman of the Robes, sometimes repose themselves
on the Steps going to the Sovereign’s Stall.

This being done, preparation for _Vespers_ begin; in reference to
which, the Prelate ascends the _Altar_, it being the Duty of his
Office, which if he omits, he is fined twenty Marks, to the use of the
College, unless he give sufficient reason for his absence; in which
Case, or on the vacancy of the See of _Winchester_, the Sovereign hath
sometimes appointed another Bishop to Officiate for him. The Proceeding
to the _Altar_, on this occasion, is as follows.

First, The Serjeant of the Vestry makes a double Reverence, then comes
before the Prelate, and makes a single one to him; who thereon arises
from his Seat, and the Serjeant proceeds before him into the middle of
the _Choir_, where the Prelate makes a double Reverence; and passing
forward after the Serjeant, and having ascended the uppermost
_Haut-pas_ before the _Altar_, he makes one single Reverence toward the
same, and so goes to the North side of it.

After which, the two _Provincial Kings_, _Heralds_, and _Pursuivants_,
leaving their fore-mentioned Stations, join together till they come
near the Forms of the _Register_, _Garter_, and _Black-Rod_; where,
making their double Reverences, they divide again on each side, and
there stand.

Lastly, The Alms-Knights come down into the _Choir_ in a Body, and
there make their joint double Reverences, and then take their Chairs;
all which being finished, Divine Service is begun by the Prelate.

The like Solemnity is observed at any other Place, as well as at
_Windsor_; where, because the Alms-Knights are absent, the Pursuivants
at Arms ascend nearer the _High-Altar_ than when they are at _Windsor_;
but this occasions little Variation.

When the _Vespers_ are ended, the Prelate goes to the middle of the
_Altar_, and with great Reverence makes an Obeysance; and thence, with
the Serjeant before him, descends to the middle of the _Choir_, where
he makes his double Reverences, and so returns to his Seat; whereupon
all make ready to pass out of the _Choir_, which is performed in much
the same manner, and with the same State, as they proceeded thither;
and the Servants and Attendants of the _Knights-Companions_ are
marshalled in the same Order as they were at the beginning of the
Proceeding, that the whole Procession may again pass through them.

The Alms-Knights having entered the Guard Chamber, spread themselves on
each side thereof; the Prebends pass through them, and fall off on
either side the Room to the Presence Chamber Door.

Then the _Pursuivants_, _Heralds_, and _Provincial Kings_, proceeding
through the Lane made by the Alms-Knights and Prebends, enter the
Presence Chamber, and fall off on either side toward the Stall, the
King’s standing uppermost.

Then enter the _Knights-Companions_, and place themselves on each side
of the State, in such Order as they sat in their Stalls, the eldest
nearest the State; but those whose Companions are absent, stand alone;
after whom follow the Officers of the _Order_, disposing themselves
conveniently near the State.

Lastly, The Sovereign passes to the Step before the State, where, being
arrived, he turns toward the _Knights-Companions_, who make their
Reverences jointly to him, and he thereon puts off his Cap, and
re-salutes them; which done, the Sovereign and they withdraw into the
Privy Chamber till Supper time.

But in Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign, when the Feast of St. _George_ was
held at _White-Hall_, or _Greenwich_, and the Sovereign, as was usual
with her, proceeded no farther on the Eve to _Vespers_, than to the
great Closet, the ordinary way, and thence sent her Lieutenant into the
_Choir_. Then, in such Case, when _Vespers_ were ended, the Lieutenant
returned from the _Choir_, through the great Hall, and so back to the
said Closet, and stood at the Door thereof, attending the Sovereign’s
coming forth; from whence they all proceeded before her into the
Presence-Chamber, and there the Ceremony, for that time, ended.

But in the Reign of King _James_ I. when the Supper on the Eve, as also
the following Meals, were prepared in the Banquetting-House, the
Sovereign’s Lieutenant frequently returned from the Closet, by the
Lobby, to the said Banquetting-House, instead of going to the Presence;
and passing up the State, gave an End to the Ceremony till Supper time:
And so we find it observed in the 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, and 16 of
that King.

When the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ are retired, they are not
to put off any part of their Robes till Supper is over, for that is
prohibited by the _Statutes_, not only to those who do not Sup, as well
as those who do. And hereon, 19 _Car._ II. the Sovereign having a mind
to take the Air, went into _Hide-Park_, after he had taken leave of the
_Knights-Companions_, the Dukes of _York_ and _Monmouth_, and the Earl
of _Oxford_ being with him, but all in full Robes, and so returned to
Supper.


                        _The Supper on the Eve._

§ 7. When the Sovereign is pleased to Sup publickly, on the Eve of the
Feast at _Windsor_, the Supper has been always prepared in St.
_George_’s _Hall_. The usual Place at _White-Hall_, was heretofore in
the Presence Chamber; of later times, the Banquetting-House; and at
_Greenwich_, either the Presence, or the Council Chamber; where the
Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, were always present. But when the Feast
of St. _George_ was celebrated at _York_, 17 _Car._ I. the Sovereign
and _Knights-Companions_ marched after the first _Vespers_, to a House
prepared for that purpose, and supped there.

But if the Eve of the Feast fell out on a Fasting Day, as it did 22
_Hen._ VIII. and 11 _Jac._ I. the Supper was always omitted; and the
Sovereign, with his Lieutenant, and _Knights-Companions_, were served
of the Void only.

Nor does the Sovereign, when he Sups publickly, pass privately to the
Place; but as soon as notice is given that the first Mess is set upon
the Table, he presently enters the Presence Chamber, whence the
Officers of the _Order_, and of Arms, the _Knights-Companions_ in their
full Robes, for so the _Statutes_ expresly direct, having put
themselves into their usual Order, proceed before him to St.
_George_’s-_Hall_: Where being entered, the _Pursuivants_, _Heralds_,
and _Provincial Kings_, fall off all upon the right Hand, opposite to
the _Knights-Companions_ Table, the _Junior Pursuivants_ standing
toward the lower End of the Hall. Then the _Knights-Companions_ passing
up beyond them, formerly divided themselves on either side, according
to the Decree, 16 _Hen._ VIII. and made a stand, each taking Place,
according to the Order of their Stalls. But at the Feast held at
_White-Hall_, 19 _Car._ II. the Sovereign directed that they should
stand all on the right Hand side, facing the Table.

Next, the five Officers of the _Order_ follow, who ascending beyond the
_Senior_ Knight, retire on the right Hand: After them the Sovereign,
and the Officers of Arms, all doing him Reverence as he passes by: Who
passing up to the _Haut-pas_, before his own Table, turns himself to
the _Knights-Companions_, and putting off his Cap, they return their
Reverences jointly to him.

The Sovereign sitting down to Supper, is first served by Water by some
Nobleman; then Grace is said by the Prelate; then is the _Senior_
Knight conducted to his Table by two Officers of _Arms_, and so the
rest in Order, to the Tables appointed them. Whereupon the Officers of
the _Order_, and of Arms, retire out of the Hall to Supper.

If a Lieutenant be constituted, he proceeds to Supper in full Robes,
and in the same Order as doth the Sovereign, and sits alone at the
Sovereign’s Table, yet on the left Hand of the Cloth of State, being
served in all Points with Water, and by a _Cup-bearer_, _Carver_, and
_Sewer_, as the Sovereign himself is.

When Supper is ended, and the Banquet taken away, the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_ proceed back in the same Order they came to the
Presence Chamber, where the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, standing on
the Step before the Cloth of State, Salutes them as before; and then
appoints the Hour and Place for the _Knights-Companions_ to attend
him the next Morning: The like, if the Supper be provided in any
other Place besides the Presence Chamber, the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_ proceed back thither, because the Ceremony ought
to end there, as has always been the Custom. And if the Supper be
prepared in the Presence Chamber, they then take their Leave in the
same Room, there being no occasion to proceed farther.

If any of the _Knights-Companions_ accompany the Sovereign, or his
Lieutenant, to his Lodgings, they then go after, not before him, in
regard the State of that Night’s Service ended in the Presence Chamber;
and after they have retired to their Lodging, they have Permission to
Unrobe.

When the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, do not Sup in St. _George_’s
_Hall_ on the Eve of the Feast, on the following Night, the Officers of
Arms have formerly had the Liberty to Eat there; and this Privilege was
assigned them by Decree of a _Chapter_ held 16 _Eliz._ appointing them
_that Table, which was before that time used by the Chancellor,
Register_, and other _Officers_ of the _Order_: But how they came to
lose this Privilege, is not mentioned; for now, instead of sitting in
the great Hall, they are necessitated to Eat in such Rooms of the
Castle as they can procure.




                               CAP. XXI.

            _The Order of the Ceremonies on the Feast Day._


            _The Proceeding to the Chappel in the Morning._

§ 1. Notwithstanding the Celebration of the Feast takes up three Days,
_viz._ part of the twenty second, all the twenty third, and part of the
twenty fourth of _April_, yet the twenty third, St. _George_’s _Day_,
is the Grand Part: The Ceremonies of which may be divided into Sacred
and Civil, the first solemnized in the Chappel, the latter in St.
_George_’s _Hall_.

In Order to which, _the Knights-Companions_ in full Robes repair to the
Sovereign’s Privy Lodgings, at the Hour appointed; as also the Officers
of the _Order_. In the mean time the rest of the Degrees and Persons,
which made up the Proceeding on the Eve of the Feast, take their
several Stations then appointed them, to attend the Sovereign’s coming
out of the Presence-Chamber.

When the Sovereign, having the _Knights-Companions_, and Officers of
the _Order_ before him, has entered the Presence, the Sword is
delivered to the Nobleman appointed to bear it; and after the usual
Salutations, the Proceeding sets forward to the Chappel in the same
Order as on the Eve; the _Knights-Companions_ having their Trains born
by some of their own Gentlemen.

At the Foot of the Stairs, entering the Cloister, or Stone Gallery,
twelve Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber attend, with a rich Canopy of
Cloth of Gold, who, when the Sovereign approaches, receive him under
it, and bear it over his Head, till he comes to the _Choir Door_ of St.
_George_’s _Chappel_; which Canopy is carried only on the Morning of
the Feast Day, and not at any other time.

The Processional way to the Chappel, is the same they traversed on the
Eve, if the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ proceed to the
_Chapter-House_ first; for anciently it was the Custom to hold a
_Chapter_ in the Morning of the Feast Day, either before Mattins, or
after, before the Grand Procession set forward. This Course received
interruption in Queen _Elizabeth_’s time, during which, no Chapter was
held in the Morning, except in the 26, 31, and 38 Years of her Reign,
and then only for admitting some Officers of the _Order_: But the time
of holding this _Chapter_ was restored by King _Charles_ I. who several
times held it before the first Service began; as in the 5, 14, and 15,
of his Reign.

But if no _Chapter_ be held at this time, then, as soon as the
Proceeding comes near the Chappel, instead of entering the Passage
between the East-end of the Chappel, and King _Henry_ VIII’s Tomb
House, as it does on the Eve, by reason the Sovereign goes first to the
_Chapter-House_, it proceeds straight on to the South Door, and thence
into the _Choir_: Yet King _Charles_ II. in the 15 of his Reign,
appointed the whole Proceeding to pass by the said South Door, all
along the South side of the Chappel, and then to enter at the West
Door, which was then, and since observed.

When the Alms-Knights are come to the West Door of the _Choir_, they
enter, and pass up above the Steps of the _Altar_, in the very same
Manner and Order as they did on the Eve, and so exactly of the rest:
Which being done, the Prelate begins the Morning Service, according to
the Order observed in the Common-Prayer, only that the first Lesson
being made proper to the Festival, is taken out of the 44 Chapter of
_Ecclesiasticus_.

This Solemn Proceeding to the Chappel in the Morning of the Feast Day,
is, and has been, most usual performed on Foot; yet there are Instances
heretofore, where the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ have proceeded
on Horse-back, for the greater Splendor and Gallantry of the _Order_:
As in 16 _Edw._ IV. when several Ladies rode in the Cavalcade, richly
adorned, of which Habit mention is already made. So also 3 _Hen._ VII.
when it was augmented by the Presence of the Queen, and the King’s
Mother, attended by a splendid Train of Ladies: And again the 22 of the
same King, when he held the Feast at _Baynard_’s-_Castle_, in _London_,
he proceeded on Horse back to St. _Paul_’s: The like King _Henry_ VIII.
did at _Windsor_, on the Feast of St. _George_, 11 of his Reign; and
King _Philip_, 1 and 2 of _Phil._ and _Mar._ and Queen _Elizabeth_, in
the 6 of her Reign, in her whole Habit of the _Order_; so did the
Sovereign’s Lieutenant at the same Feast ride to the first and second
_Vespers_, and to the Morning Service the Day after.

It was a Custom begun by Queen _Elizabeth_, and used when she
celebrated St. _George_’s _Feast_, either at _White-Hall_, or
_Greenwich_, for the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, and _Knights-Companions_,
in full Robes, attended with the Officers of the _Order_, and of
_Arms_, to meet in the Presence Chamber, about nine in the Morning of
the Feast Day, and proceed thence as they did the Evening before,
through the Guard Chamber, down into the great Hall, and thence into
the Chappel, where they took their Stalls, as on the Eve; after which,
Morning Prayer was performed as far as the Litany, and this was called
the first Service; which done, they all descended from their Stalls, in
the accustomed Order, and proceeded back to the Presence, and there
waited the coming of the Sovereign, before whom they proceeded a second
time to the _Choir_, where the Litany, and Grand Procession began,
called the second Service, at which the Sovereign was usually Present;
but seldom at the first Service.

The first Instance we have met with of this double Proceeding, is
recorded in the _Blue-Book_ of the _Order_, 3 _Eliz._ and was continued
throughout her Reign; and that of King _James_ I. not only when the
Feast of St. _George_ was celebrated at _White-Hall_, or _Greenwich_,
but also at other times, when celebrated at _Windsor_; and so 1 _Car._
I. But from that time, the Sovereign went to the Chappel at the
beginning of Morning Service, which was continued without interruption:
Which way has been ever since duly observed.

But when it was known that the Sovereign did not go in the Grand
Procession, but his Lieutenant for him; then the Service was constantly
gone through withal at once.


                _The Proceeding to the second Service._

§ 2. When the Feast has been celebrated elsewhere than at _Windsor_, as
soon as the Prelate was come down from the _Altar_, on finishing the
first Service, the _Knights-Companions_ descended from their Stalls in
usual Order; and then the Lieutenant, with the Officers of the _Order_,
and of _Arms_, proceeded before him to the Presence, to conduct the
Sovereign to the second Service; which second Proceeding was disposed
in the same manner as was that to the first Service in the Morning;
only in the latter, because the Sovereign proceeded, the Sword was also
carried.


                       _Of the Grand Procession._

§ 3. We are now arrived at the Grand Procession of this most Noble
_Order_, which is indeed the most Solemn, and Magnificent Part of the
whole Ceremony, and has always been celebrated in the Morning of the
Feast Day of St. _George_; or on such other Day, as the Sovereign hath
appointed by Prorogation to hold the same. But as to the instant of
Time when it began, it has sometimes been uncertain; with respect to
the conveniency of the Church Service, when it was conceived most
proper; which was generally at the end of the second Collect, and
before the Litany: Nevertheless, in 6 _Eliz._ the Feast being then held
at _Windsor_, it began presently after the _Te Deum_ was Sung; and the
twentieth of the said Queen’s Reign, at _Greenwich_, after reading the
second Lesson. And to come nearer our Times, the Grand Procession set
forward, 8 _Car._ I. when the first Service was finished; and 17 _Car._
I. after the Sermon was ended: But at the Grand Feast, 13 _Car._ II. it
was brought to its usual time, after the last Collect.

As to the Proceeding, or Processional way at _Windsor_, that has not
been always the same; sometimes it was confined within the Walls of St.
_George_’s _Chappel_, but at other times enlarged through the lower
Court of the Castle; a few Instances of both Cases are remaining, but
none of any ancient date.

What the Order and Manner of this Ceremony was, may be collected from
what an old Relator says, of the Solemn Procession made the 29 _May_, 5
_Hen._ VIII. _That it was ordered as of old Time accustomed_.

First went the Alms-Knights, two and two on either side the _Choir_,
then the Officers of Arms, next the _Knights-Companions_; after them
the Officers of the _Order_, and then the Prelate bearing the Heart of
St. _George_, under a Canopy honourably assisted, four Noblemen bearing
each a Torch; and last of all the Sovereign.

And though here is no mention of any Ecclesiasticks, that joined
themselves in the Proceeding; yet it cannot be supposed, that as part
of the Divine Service was to be performed, but that some of the
Chaplains and Priests were included. And we meet with one Instance,
where the Priests not only went in the Grand Procession, but had a
Place assigned in it; where the Gentlemen of the Sovereign’s _Chappel_,
and _Choir_ of _Windsor_, now go.

But it must be confessed, that the Records of the _Order_ are very
defective in this particular, relating to the Grand Procession, and
speak of it only in general, or at most, take notice but of some of
those Degrees that attend in it; and this but of late Time neither:
Among which, 23 _Eliz._ it is said; _They all proceeded in Order, as
the Custom was_; the Sovereign following in the Rear of the Procession.

As to Place and Precedency, it is in every respect the same, as in the
Sovereign’s Proceeding to the Chappel, on the Eve of the Grand Feast;
only here are some Persons added, which go not in that; Namely, the
Gentlemen and Choiristers of the Sovereign’s Chappel at _White-Hall_;
and the Petty-Canons, Vicars, and Choiristers of _Windsor_: The whole
Order is as follows.

The Morning Service having proceeded to the second Lesson, and the
Prelate conducted by the Serjeant of the Vestry from the _Altar_ to his
Seat;

The Alms-Knights rise from their Seats, and pass to the middle of the
_Choir_; and after their accustomed Reverences, go up to the sides of
the _Altar_.

Next, in like manner, the Officers of Arms pass up.

Hereupon _Garter_ rises from his Seat, and makes his usual Reverences;
then waving his Rod, summons the _Junior_ Knights to descend.

Whilst they and the rest of the _Knights-Companions_ are leaving their
Stalls, with usual Reverences; the Gentlemen of the Chappel,
Petty-Canons, and Vicars of _Windsor_, put on Copes, and make
themselves ready to proceed.

Then the _Knights-Companions_ being all come down, stand each under his
proper Stall.

Then the _Black-Rod_, _Garter_, and _Register_ rise, and stand before
their Forms.

So do the Chancellor and Prelate.

This done, the Alms-Knights come down from the _Altar_, and passing
into the middle of the _Choir_, make again their double Reverences, and
proceed out of the _Choir_.

After them the Choiristers pass in a Body to the middle of the _Choir_,
and having made their double Reverences, (as do all that follow,)
proceed forth two and two.

So do the Vicars of _Windsor_.

Next, the four Petty-Canons come from their Seats, into the middle of
the _Choir_; and there begin to Sing an Hymn.

Then follows the Serjeant of the Vestry, bearing his gilt Rod.

After him the Gentlemen of the Chappel at _White-Hall_.

Next the Virger of _Windsor Chappel_, bearing his Silver Rod.

Then the Prebends of _Windsor_.

After whom the Officers of Arms come down from the _Altar_, and pass on.

Then the _Knights-Companions_, the _Juniors_ first.

Then the _Black-Rod_, _Garter_, and _Register_.

The Chancellor and Prelate.

The Nobleman that bears the Sword of State.

Then the Sovereign, above in his Stall, makes a Reverence toward the
_Altar_, and being descended, another below; then passes out, and
enters under the Canopy, which waits for him at the _Choir Door_; the
Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, if not a Knight of the _Order_,
attending somewhat behind the side of the Canopy, on the Sovereign’s
right Hand; and the Vice Chamberlain at the like distance on his left;
as in the Grand Procession, 23 _Car._ II.

And lastly, The Band of Pensioners, who attend the Guard on each side
the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_, with their Captain at the Head
of them.

In this Order, to this Day, they proceed with great Devotion; the whole
_Choir_ Singing the Office appointed, which heretofore was the Litany;
but is now generally a Thanksgiving Hymn.

The Grand Procession, when it has been celebrated at _White-Hall_, or
elsewhere than at _Windsor_, is for the most part ordered after the
aforesaid manner, as may be seen by the following Scheme.

         Serjeant of the Vestry, with his gilt Rod.
         Choiristers in Surplices.
         Gentlemen of the Chappel in Copes.
         Subdean in a Cope.
         Officers of Arms.
         Knights Companions.
         Officers of the Order.
         The Sword.
         The Sovereign under a Canopy, with his Train born up.
         The Pensioners as before.

But in what this Grand Procession differs from that at _Windsor_, we
shall here Note.

First, Here the Serjeant of the Vestry leads the Proceeding, and is
followed by the Choiristers.

Secondly, The Prebends and _Choir_ of _Windsor_, and the Alms-Knights,
are here wanting.

Thirdly, The Subdean and Dean of the Chappel are taken in, and proceed
next to the Gentlemen of the Chappel, to whom the Sovereign’s Almoner
has sometimes joined himself.

Fourthly, Whilst the _Knights-Companions_ are descending from their
Stalls, the Gentlemen of the Chappel go into the Vestry, to put on
their Copes; but the Dean of the Chappel hath his brought into the
_Choir_, which he puts on below, under his Seat.

Fifthly and Lastly, In Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign, the Ladies Attendants
went with the Pensioners on either side the Sovereign.

To contribute more to the Pomp and State of this great Ceremony, a
Canopy is born over the Sovereign’s Head, by Knights and Gentlemen of
Quality, while he passeth in Procession, till he return to the _Choir
Door_.

The Persons appointed to carry the Canopy, _Anno_ 11 _Hen._ VIII. were
four Knights of the Body, when four other Knights bore four Wax Tapers;
but since they are the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in ordinary, who
at the time of the Feast are in waiting, twelve of whom are appointed
for this Service; the Sovereign hath also the long Train of his Mantle
carried up by several of the young Nobility, who receive notice thereof
by the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold.

In like manner the Lieutenants, or Deputies to the Sovereign, have had
their Train carried up in the Proceedings, by Persons of Distinction;
and the Train of a Stranger King, personally present at _Windsor_, hath
also been born up; and in like manner the Train of a Deputy from a
Stranger King; and lastly, the _Knights-Companions_ have their Trains
carried up by their own Gentlemen.

The Cloaths and Apparel of the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_, and
the great variety of rich Jewels which surround or adorn their Caps, or
where else they may appear most conspicuous, shine with great Lustre.

The _Provincial Kings_, _Heralds_, and _Pursuivants_, habited in their
rich Coats, and going together in one Body, appear also very
conspicuous, from the Royal Arms of the Sovereign richly Embroidered on
them with fine Gold, Purples and Twist; the Ground of the _Provincial
King’s_ Coats are blue Velvet, the _Heralds_ blue Sattin, and the
_Pursuivants_ blue Damask.

The Habit in which the Canons of the College proceed, is also peculiar;
for though, as Clergymen, they are vested in Linen Surplices at all
times of Divine Service, yet at this Solemnity they wear a Mantle over
those Surplices, which is a Habit appointed for them, from the
Foundation of the _Order_; these Mantles are of _Murry Taffety_, and on
the right Shoulder is an Escutcheon of St. _George_’s _Arms_ within a
Rundlet, Embroidered with Gold and Silk, which is bought at their own
Charge.

The Gentlemen of the Sovereign’s Chappel, the Petty-Canons, and Vicars
of _Windsor_, appear in Habits more glorious, being all (or the most
part of them) vested in rich Copes of Cloth of Gold, or most costly
Embroideries; but the Children of the Chappel and Choiristers, proceed
habited in Surplices of white Linen; lastly, the Habits of the
Alms-Knights [a Mantle and Kirtle] are not unremarkable both for Colour
and Materials, which appear suitable to their Age and Degree. The
Mantles are of Cloth, which the _Statutes_ appoint to be of a red
Colour, with a Shield of the Arms of St. _George_, but without a Garter
to surround them.

In this Grand Proceeding, the Habits entertain the Beholders with a
very delightful Prospect, being so ordered, that the Grave are placed
between those that are Rich and Gallant; and to add to the greater Shew
of this Solemn Ceremony, the Registers of the _Order_ make mention of
divers Persons of Rank and Quality, who put themselves on the Duty of
Attendance on their Sovereign, because related to his Service, though
in reference to the _Order_ not so concerned as to be taken into the
Proceeding; such are divers of the Nobility, sometimes great Ladies,
many considerable Officers of the Houshold, and other Courtiers, all
richly habited and attired.

To complete the Pomp of this great Solemnity, we may (in the last
Place,) fitly remember the Musick, as a part thereof, the _Choirs_ of
the Sovereign’s Chappel at St. _James_’s, and at _Windsor_, being
united, all Singing the sacred Hymn together, while the Grand
Procession devoutly passeth; and on their return to the _Choir Door_,
the Alms-Knights first advance into it, and after double Reverences
ascend above the _Haut Pas_’s to the _Altar_.

Next the Choiristers, and in like manner the Vicars, Petty-Canons of
_Windsor_, Gentlemen of the Chappel, and Prebends, go to their Seats.

Then the Officers of Arms pass up, and join to the Alms-Knights. After
this the _Knights-Companions_ enter, and stand before their Stalls.

The like doth the _Black-Rod_, _Garter_, and _Register_.

As also the _Chancellor_ and _Prelate_.

Then doth the Sovereign take his Royal Stall.

The _Knights-Companions_ ascend their Stalls.

The Officers of the _Order_ sit down on their Forms, in the same Manner
and Order, and with like Reverences, as at their Entrance into the
_Choir_, on the Eve of the Feast.

Then the Prelate, with two Prebends, (appointed to read the Epistle and
Gospel,) are conducted, the one by the Serjeants of the Vestry, the
other by the Virger, up to the _Altar_, (which they approach with usual
Reverences,) the Prelate passing to the North-side, and the Prebends to
the South, to finish the remaining part of Divine Service.

Whereupon the Officers of Arms descend into the _Choir_; And

The Alms-Knights go down to their Seats, which, while they are so
doing, the two Prebends put on their Copes at the South-side of the
_Altar_. This done, the Prelate begins the second Service, which hath
been celebrated, since the time of the Reformation, according to the
Book of _Common-Prayer_, and is the same commonly used on any other
Feast Day; excepting a peculiar Epistle and Gospel; the first being the
thirty third Chapter of _Deuteronomy_, and the latter the fifth Chapter
of St. _John_, beginning at the twenty fourth Verse, and ending at the
thirtieth; which being read, the Creed is Sung.

We may here Note, that before the Reformation, it belonged to the Abbot
of _Tower-Hill_ to read the Gospel, and to the Prior of _Medemenham_ in
_Norfolk_, to read the Epistle.


                   _The Offering of Gold and Silver._

§ 4: This Ceremony, whether it be performed in the Sovereign’s Chappel
at _Windsor_, or in any other Church or Chappel, is one and the same,
(except the Sovereign’s Offering of Gold and Silver, instead of the
_Bezant_,) which is peculiar to _Windsor_.

The accustomed time of Offering on the Feast Day, is mentioned _Anno_
22 _Hen._ VIII. to be after the Sovereign’s return to his Stall from
the Grand Procession, in the time of High Mass, and at this Day begins
immediately after this first Sentence of the Offertory is pronounced by
the Prelate.

_Let your Light so shine before men_, &c.

This said, the Organ begins to Play, and forthwith a Groom and Page of
the removing Wardrobe, (with Reverence first made,) unrol a long
Carpet, and spread it before the _Altar_; which being done, the
_Alms-Knights_ first, next the _Pursuivants_, _Heralds_, and
_Provincial Kings_, ascend in usual Order, and flank the Carpet on both
sides. Then _Garter_ steps from his Seat, and after double Reverences,
and the usual manner of waving his Rod, the _Knights-Companions_
descend in their accustom’d Order, and stand before their Stalls.

After this, _Black-Rod_ goes from his Seat to the _Altar_, towards
which, making a single Reverence, he turns his Back, and immediately
the Groom of the removing Wardrobe delivereth him a little Carpet,
anciently of Silk, now of Cloth of Gold; and the said Groom holds on
his Arms a Cushion of Cloth of Gold, for the Sovereign to Kneel upon,
at the time of his Offering, which the _Black-Rod_ forthwith lays on
the upper _Haut Pas_ before the _Altar_, and each of them, as well in
delivering, as receiving the Cushion, kiss it.

After this, the Prelate of the _Order_ takes a gilt Bason to receive
the Sovereign’s Offering, and stands before the middle of the _Altar_,
with one of the Prebends to assist him, at which time the Sovereign
arising makes his Reverence towards the _Altar_, and then descending,
makes a little Reverence below, and ascends towards the _Altar_ with
his Attendants, and being come into the middle of the _Choir_, he makes
another Reverence, and at the first _Haut Pas_ his last.

He that bears the Sovereign’s Offering, is either the _Senior_ Knight,
the Prince, or the greatest Estate among the _Knights-Companions_ then
present, and no other Person, (of what Degree soever) if he be not of
this Noble Fraternity, performs this Service.

The Sovereign being come to the upper _Haut Pas_ kneels, at which
Instant _Black-Rod_ on his Knee delivers (with Assay) the Sovereign’s
Offering to the _Senior_ Knight, or other Person nominated, and he
kneeling presents it to the Sovereign, which he immediately Offers into
the Bason held by the Prelate, and then ariseth, and is conducted and
attended, as when he came up to Offer; at the Entrance into his Stall,
he turns and makes a Reverence, and his Attendants also bow towards the
_Altar_; and being attended into his Stall, doth the like again, and
then reposeth himself in his Seat.

An Entry is made in the _Red-Book_, _Anno_ 6 _Car._ I. _That whereas in
other Places_ (_besides_ Windsor) _the Sovereign is wont to Offer a
certain Gold Piece, (vulgarly called a Bezant) to be redeemed
afterwards at a certain Price; the Usher of the_ Black-Rod _having been
admonished, that in these Services there is no Redemption to be made,
should never present the Bezant at_ Windsor _to the Sovereign, but Gold
and Silver of English Money._

When the Sovereign is absent, and the Lieutenant Offers for him, he
performs the Ceremony as follows.

First, (After the Preparations made for the Offering, as aforesaid,) he
descends from his Stall with the usual Reverences, and goes to the
Steps ascending the Sovereign’s Stall, and there stands a while; then
making his double Obeysance, he proceeds towards the _Altar_ (the
Officers of the _Order_ going before him,) with one other Reverence in
the middle of the _Choir_, and another at the first _Haut Pas_ of the
_Altar_; the Carpet and Cushion is spread and laid for him, as is for
the Sovereign, and the Offering also given in the same way, and the
Lieutenant kneeling puts it in the Bason, and returns to the
Sovereign’s Stall in the same Order, _&c._ he came; where standing a
while again before it, he makes a Reverence towards it, and then goes
up into his own Stall, where (if it fall out that the Lieutenant is not
the _Senior_ Knight,) he stays to receive the Reverences of all the
_Knights-Companions_ his _Seniors_, as they go up to Offer, and when
his own turn comes to Offer, he descends with a double Reverence, and
proceeds up with his Fellow, (if present) and Offers for himself in his
own Place, but his Train is then let down, the Carpet, _&c._ taken
away, and only two Officers of Arms (but none of the _Order_) proceeds
before him, and when he has Offer’d, he returns to his Stall.

But it seems, 7 _Jac._ I. that _Garter_ alone, on the Feast Day,
brought up the Prince, then the Sovereign’s Lieutenant, when he came to
Offer for himself, which Service ought to have been performed by
_Clarenceux_ and _Norroy_, which was an oversight in _Garter_; as
likewise his bringing down at the same, the _Knights-Companions_ out of
their Stalls to Offer, before the Epistle and Gospel were Read,
contrary to the usage of former times; by which they were kept a
tedious time waiting below in the _Choir_, before the Offering began.
But 11 _Jac._ I. the Prince was brought up by _Clarenceux_ and
_Norroy_, when he came to Offer, and not by _Garter_. When the
Lieutenant hath Offered for himself, he returns to the lower end of the
Stalls, and passes to his own, where having paid the usual Reverences,
he enters it, and is ready to receive the Reverences of all the other
_Knights-Companions_.

As soon as the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, is returned to his Stall,
the two Provincial Kings pass down into the middle of the _Choir_,
where making Reverences jointly to the _Altar_, and next to the
Sovereign, _Clarenceux_ turns himself to the _Senior_ Knight, and makes
him a third Reverence, while _Norroy_ at the same Instant does the same
to the next _Junior_ Knight, and so both, as an intimation of their
going up to Offer; then each King retires a little backward toward the
Stalls: In the mean time, the two _Senior_ Knights draw near together,
and making double Reverences, _Clarenceux_ and _Norroy_ step forth, and
pass up before them, till they arrive near the Prelate; (or if the
_Senior_ Knight be without his Opposite, then he is brought up single,)
then making their Reverences, first towards the _Altar_, next to the
Knights, _Clarenceux_ retires to the right side, and _Norroy_ to the
left, waiting for the return of the Knights, who are kneeling on the
uppermost _Haut Pas_ of the _Altar_, making their Offering. Which
humble Ceremony of kneeling, not being heretofore used, was fixed by a
Decree of 4 _Car._ I.

The _Knights-Companions_ Offerings are both of Silver and Gold, which
is receiv’d by two of the Prebends, or by one Prebend and one Chantor,
anciently by one Chantor only, when the Offering is at _Windsor_; but
by the Dean of the Chappel, when at _White-Hall_. The Offering being
made, the _Knights-Companions_ rise, and forthwith divide themselves,
_Clarenceux_ conducting the _Senior_ Knight to the lower end of the
Stalls on the Sovereign’s side; and _Norroy_ the next _Junior_ Knight,
to the lower end of the Stalls on the Prince’s side; and at parting
make their Reverences, and return to their Stations before the _Altar_.
The Knights, at their Entrance into the Stalls, make their double
Reverences together, and then pass on to their own; where making the
like Reverences, they take their Seats.

But if any Stranger King be present at the Offering, he does not retire
to his Seat, by the lower end of the Stalls, but along the _Choir_, as
does the Sovereign, the same way he proceeded up: So did the King of
_Denmark_, 4 _Jac._ I.

The Ceremonies of the two _Senior_ Knights Offering being finished, the
two _Senior Heralds_ observing their last Reverences, pass down into
the _Choir_, in the same manner as did _Clarenceux_ and _Norroy_, to
bring up the next two _Senior_ Knights to Offer, who use all the same
Ceremonies, and are conducted back in like manner to the _Altar_; and
so of the other, brought up by the two next _Senior Heralds_;
_Clarenceaux_ and _Norroy_ beginning again, if there are more Knights
than the _Heralds_ in one Course supply; and after them the _Heralds_
again, till the whole is ended: And here it may be noted, that where
any Knight goeth single to Offer, he hath nevertheless two _Heralds_ to
attend him.

Touching the Offerings themselves, made in the Chappel of _Windsor_,
they belong of right to the Dean and Prebends, being conferr’d on them
by the _Statutes_ of the College: And ordained also, that the _Chantor_
should see them receiv’d, and faithfully kept; and at the end of every
Month, or Weekly, if the College required it, give an Account of what
was receiv’d: All which was confirmed by King _Edward_ III. the Bishop,
Dean, and Chapter of _Salisbury_, to whose Jurisdiction the College of
_Windsor_ belongs; and also by the Bishop of _Winchester_, Prelate of
the _Garter_, 1352. But Dr. _Montague_, Bishop of _Winchester_, at the
Feast at _Windsor_, 21 _Jac._ I. challenged a right to the Offerings;
and Bishop _Andrews_ did _de Facto_ both receive, and keep the
Offerings, whenever he officiated at _Windsor_. But on complaint of the
Dean and Prebends of _Windsor_, this matter was referred to the
Chapter; yet we do not find that any final or positive Determination
was ever made to the time of the Restauration, from which time the
right of the Dean and Canons has never been disputed, and the
_Statutes_ have duly taken Place.

What has usually been offered, either in Gold or Silver, we shall see
by the Account given in by the Bishop of _Winchester_, 4 _Car._ I. at
St. _George_’s _Feast_ at _Windsor_, _September_ 24.

The whole Offering of the eight Knights, is four Pounds fifteen
Shillings, _viz._ in Gold ten Shillings each, and in Silver two;
excepting the Lord Steward, whose Offering in Silver was only one
Shilling; besides the Sovereign’s _Bezant_ redeemable.

The Offerings on the twenty fifth Day.

His Majesty’s Offering in Gold one Pound, and in Silver ten Shillings.

The eight _Knights-Companions_ the same as the Day before; the whole,
besides the King’s _Bezant_, eleven Pounds.

When all the Knights have offered, and are returned to their Stalls,
the Chancellor of the _Order_ makes his Reverences; and after him, the
_Register_, _Garter_, and _Black-Rod_, theirs together, and take their
Seats: Next, the Carpet being rolled up by the Groom and Page of the
removing Wardrobe, the _Provincial Kings_, _Heralds_, and
_Pursuivants_, and last of all the Alms-Knights, make their Reverences,
and pass into the _Choir_, where they remain till the Prelate has
finished the second Service; who, conducted by the Serjeant of the
Vestry, comes down from the _Altar_ with his accustomed Reverences to
his Seat. After whom, the two Prebends are brought down by the Virger,
who making their usual Reverences take their Seats.


                     _The Return to the Presence._

§ 6. Immediately after, all prepare to pass out of the _Choir_, and to
proceed back to the Presence Chamber, which is done in every particular
as it is in the return of the Sovereign from the first _Vespers_.

The Proceeding passes on through the South-Door of the Chappel, and
here the Trumpets are taken in, and placed before the Alms-Knights, and
sound all the way to the Guard Chamber; at which time the Drums and
Fifes begin to beat and play. Thence the Proceeding passes into the
Presence Chamber, whither it ought to go, before the Sovereign pass
into the great Hall to Dinner; and here the _Knights-Companions_ take
their usual Stands; and after the Sovereign’s Salutation, and their
Reverences, the Sovereign retires into the Privy Chamber, and the
Knights likewise retire till Dinner is ready.


                   _Of the Dinner on the Feast Day._

§ 7. As soon as the Sovereign hath notice given him, that the first
Mess is set on the Table, the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ come
out of the Privy Lodgings into the Presence Chamber, attended by the
Officers of the _Order_, and seat themselves in the same manner, as at
the Supper on the Eve of the Feast: The Musick sounding whilst the said
Mess is carrying up; which is in the following Order.


  Four Serjeants at Arms,                  two and two.
  The Comptroller.                         The Treasurer.
                               The Sewer.
  The Messes carried up by the Pensioners.
  Master of the Houshold.                  Cofferer.
  A Clerk Comptroller.                     A Clerk Comptroller.
  Second Clerk of the Kitchin.             Chief Clerk of the Kitchin.


The Sovereign hath most frequently sat alone, though sometimes
heretofore he hath been pleased to admit some of the
_Knights-Companions_ to sit at the Table with him; but this Honour has
not been offered to any of them since the Reign of Queen _Elizabeth_.
As soon as the Sovereign is placed, the _Knights-Companions_ put on
their Caps, and remaining covered, retire against the Tables prepared
for them; where Water is brought them by a Gentleman of Quality; and
having washed, they all sit down.

The Order of passing to their Seats at the Table, 19 _Car._ II. and so
appointed to be observed for the future, was after the following
manner. First, The Duke of _York_ entered the Rails at the upper end of
the Table, and passed down the hither side, to the lower end, and
thence to the bench-side to his Place: In like manner followed all the
other Knights, according to the Seniority of their Stalls, as it is
ordained they shall sit, and not according to their Estates or
Dignities, (except the Sons of Stranger Kings, Princes, and Dukes,) and
all on the right Hand, or farther side of their Table, not one against
another, but two and two at a Table to a Mess, and those whose
Opposites are wanting to sit alone, and have a whole Mess. Their Meat
being usually brought up by the Yeomen of the Guard; and are attended
by some of the Gentlemen Pensioners, and others of the Sovereigns
Servants, two to each Table.

It appears that anciently the Officers of the _Order_ had a Table
allowed them in the great Hall, and sat covered in the Sovereign’s
Presence; but on the Eve of the Feast, 10 _Car._ I. it was ordered in
_Chapter_, That they should be at their Choice, to keep the Feast
privately by themselves, or sit uncovered where the Sovereign dined.
Whereupon, from that time, they forbore sitting in the Hall, or where
else the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_ sat. It likewise appears,
that the Officers of Arms did anciently sit in St. _George_’s _Hall_,
at a Table joined to that, at which the Officers of the _Order_ sat.

Before the Entrance of the Sovereign’s second Course, he stands up and
drinks to the _Knights-Companions_, (and so it is remembred to be done
by _Phil._ and _Mar._) they standing all the while uncovered, till they
have all pledged him: Which done, the Officers of Arms make themselves
ready, at the lower end of the Hall, to proceed up in the following
_Order_.


                        Garter.
                        Clarenceux and Norroy.
                        Heralds two and two.
                        Pursuivants two and two.


And so altogether make their Reverence to the Sovereign, and proceed
near the side of the Knights Table, till they come to the middle of the
Hall, where, after another Reverence made, they go still forward; and
when _Garter_ has passed about two Yards beyond the Knights Table, and
come near the _Haut Pas_ ascending the Sovereign’s State, they make the
like Reverence again jointly. Then _Garter_ with a loud and audible
Voice cries Largess thrice, though anciently but twice.

Upon _Garter’s_ beginning to cry Largess, all the _Knights-Companions_,
unless Kings and great Princes, if any be present, stand up uncovered,
till he has made an end; (which Custom, it seems, 7 _Car._ I. had been
discontinued for some time.) Then _Garter_ proceeds, and Proclaims the
Sovereign’s Stiles and Titles of Honour, first in _Latin_, after in
_French_, and lastly in _English_; he and the Officers of Arms making a
Reverence between; and at the end join altogether in crying Largess
thrice, and then all make Reverence together.

Hereupon, sometimes the Treasurer of the Houshold puts the Sovereign’s
Largess, which is ten Pounds in Gold, into _Garter_’s Hat; and this is
afterwards divided among the Officers of Arms, according to Custom. But
_Anno_ 23 _Car._ II. the _Black-Rod_ put the Largess into _Garter_’s
Hat. This being finished, all the Officers of Arms retire about three
Yards backward, keeping their Faces towards the Sovereign, and there
make a Reverence, and so a second, and thence retire out of the Hall to
Dinner.

This Ceremony ended, the Sovereign’s second Course is brought up; first
the Serjeants at Arms, next the Treasurer and Comptroller of the
Houshold, next the Sewer, then the Gentlemen-Pensioners, bearing the
Messes; then the Cofferer and Master of the Houshold, the two Clerks of
the Green-Cloth, the two Clerks Comptrollers, and lastly the two Clerks
of the Kitchin, habited in their Gowns, and their Caps in their Hands.
And after the Sovereign’s Table is compleatly furnished, the second
Course is served up to the Knights Table by the Yeomen of the Guard, in
such Order as was the first.

But where any _Knight-Companion_ happens to be installed at this Grand
Feast, and is present at Dinner, then _Garter_, and the Officers of
Arms, proceed in Order, (after they have proclaimed the Sovereign’s
Stile,) from the lower end of the Hall, till they come before the new
installed Knight’s Mess, and there _Garter_ cries Largess once, and
Proclaims his Stile in _English_ only; and then retires to Dinner.

In the last Place comes in the Banquet, brought to the Sovereign’s
Table by the Pensioners, in the same Order as the Messes; (only in
Place of the Clerk of the Kitchin, the Chief Clerk of the Spicery
waits,) and the Banquet for the _Knights-Companions_, by the Yeomen of
the Guard.

Dinner being ended, the _Knights-Companions_ rise first, and having
washed, place themselves a little below the State, in their usual
Order, and make their Reverences to the Sovereign. After which, the
Sovereign hears Grace said by the Prelate, then Water is brought in the
usual way, and the Sovereign washes: Which done, the Knights making
again due Reverence to the Sovereign, he puts off his Cap, and salutes
them, and then proceeds as usually to the Presence Chamber, with the
Knights and Officers of the _Order_ before him, _&c._

In like manner does the Sovereign’s Lieutenant proceed from the
Presence to the Hall, or such other Room where the Dinner is prepared,
only his Place at the Table is a little on the left Hand the Cloth of
State, or at the end of the Table: And after Dinner, he returns to the
Presence in the same Order as the Sovereign does.


           _The Ceremonies belonging to the second_ Vespers.

§ 8. The usual time for Proceeding to the _Chapter-House_, hath usually
been about four a Clock in the Afternoon, but sometimes not before
five, by reason of the length of the Dinner. The Proceeding is as at
other times; and when the Sovereign and Knights have made a Cavalcade
of it on the Eve, or on the Feast Day, the same has been observed at
the Proceeding to the second _Vespers_.

It has been customary to hold a _Chapter_ before the second _Vespers_,
for the regulation of the Affairs of the _Order_. When the second
_Vespers_ are ended, the Proceeding passes out of the _Choir_ in the
very same Order as at the first _Vespers_; but _Anno_ 15 _Car._ I. it
happening to be late ere the second _Vespers_ ended, the Sovereign did
not go to the Presence Chamber, but proceeded directly to the great
Hall to Supper by Torch Light.


            _Of the Supper on the Evening of the Feast Day._

§ 9. It has not been frequently known, that the Sovereign hath supped
publickly in St. _George_’s _Hall_ on the Feast Day; but when it
happens, as 14 _Car._ I. the Proceeding thither, and return, are in all
respects performed as at the Supper on the Eve. And if the Sovereign’s
Lieutenant hath on this Night supped publickly, then it was in the
Presence Chamber, where he sat alone at the Sovereign’s Table, as at
other times.




                               CAP. XXII.

        _The Ceremonies observed on the last Day of the Feast._


                   _Of the Proceeding to the Choir._

§ 1. The manner of Proceeding to the _Chapter-House_ is performed in
the same manner as it was on the Eve of the Feast; and differs only in
this Point; that then the Sovereign and Knights are obliged by the
_Statutes_ to proceed in full Robes; here, by the Indulgence of King
_Henry_ VIII’s _Statutes_, all are dispensed with, except the upper
Robe or Mantle: And as then the Image of St. _George_ was worn Pendant
at the Coller of the _Order_, now a blue Ribbond sufficeth; and instead
of a Cap and Feather, only their ordinary Hats.

It was the ancient Custom to Celebrate a _Chapter_ in the Morning of
the last Day of the Feast, before the Sovereign proceeded to the
Chappel, chiefly to make Election of Knights, where any Stall is void;
which has sometimes been held, when the Sovereign did not go to the
Chappel, in the Privy Chamber, and then the Lieutenant, waving the
_Chapter-House_, proceeds straight on to the Chappel, and enters at the
South Door.


           _Of the elect Knights proceeding into the_ Choir.

§ 2. Where an Election has been made of a Person then present at Court,
he is called into the _Chapter-House_ by _Garter_, according to the
usual manner; and having been invested with the _George_ and _Garter_,
he usually passed in the Proceeding to the Chappel, whether it were
from the _Chapter-House_, or Presence Chamber; and in this ordinary
Apparel, always bare-headed; the Place allowed him in the Proceeding
being between the _Knights-Companions_ and the Officers of Arms: But if
two Knights have been elected, they then proceed together, before the
_Knights-Companions_. At his Entrance into the _Choir_, the elect
Knight is placed by _Garter_, next before the lowest Stall; or if there
be two elected, and both proceed to the Chappel, they are placed in the
two lowest Stalls; where they are to stand all Service time, unless
upon Licence to sit, as they have sometimes obtained.


            _Of the Ceremonies performed at Divine Service._

§ 3. In this Morning Service, before the Reformation of our Church, the
Mass of _Requiem_ was solemnly Sung, for the Souls of the
_Knights-Companions_, and all faithful Souls departed, which was
provided for by the _Statutes_. As likewise, that all the Knights
should be present thereat, unless upon License obtained, or special
Case to the contrary. At this Celebration, was the deceased Knights
Atchievements also offered with solemn Ceremony; of which we shall
speak presently.

Another Ceremony belonging to the Service of this Morning, is the
Offering of Gold and Silver, which (when the first Sentence of the
Offertory has been pronounced,) is again performed by the Sovereign and
_Knights-Companions_; the Ceremonies being the same, in all
particulars, as are observed at the like Offering on the Feast Day.

Divine Service being ended, the Sovereign and _Knights-Companions_
frequently proceed to the _Chapter-House_, and there put off their
Mantles, and therewith the Ceremonies of this Grand Feast determine.




                              CAP. XXIII.

        _The Observation of the Grand Feast by absent Knights._


         _Absent Knights enjoined to observe the Grand Feast._

§ 1. Having shewn with what Magnificence and Ceremony the Feast of St.
_George_ has been, and ought to be observed; as also how strictly the
_Statutes_ oblige the _Knights-Companions_ to appear annually thereat;
and what severe Penalties they are liable to, if absent, except on
reasonable Cause of Absence. Yet lest the Honour might receive
diminution, from too small an Appearance at its publick Solemnities; it
was farther at the Institution of the _Order_ Decreed: _That none of
them should depart the Kingdom, without first acquainting the
Sovereign, and obtaining his special Leave and License_; nevertheless
the Sovereign granted them License to go beyond Sea, before the rest of
his Subjects, if they were dispos’d to undertake any Military
Expedition, from whence any Glory of Knighthood might be hop’d for.

It was then by the eleventh Article also ordained; (on whatsoever
occasion the Absence might be,) _That wheresoever any of the_
Knights-Companions _resided, during the said Feast, they should wear
their Mantles of the_ Order, _from the Hour of the first Vespers on the
Eve of St._ George, _till the second_ Vespers _on the Feast Day were
finished; as they should have done, had they been present in Person,
with the Sovereign or his Deputy, during the whole Celebration of the
Feast; (in case they were not deprived of their Liberty) the
Prorogation of the Feast notwithstanding_.

King _Henry_ VIII. observing the Custom of these Celebrations began to
be neglected, in the eleventh year of his Reign, enlarged the Law in
this particular, explaining the said eleventh Article. He declar’d and
enjoin’d the wearing of the whole Habit on the Eve of St. _George_, if
the _Knight-Companion_ were not under restraint. Then he enumerated the
times for wearing it; to wit, on the Eve, at all times of Divine
Service, Dinner and Supper; unless in case of War, Sickness, or other
just impediment; when it was sufficient, if the absent Knight did wear
the _Garter_ and _George_, either in a Gold Chain, or Silk Ribbond.

And when the same Sovereign, about three Years after, made a
general Reformation of the _Statutes_, he enjoin’d the absent
_Knights-Companions_ (unless under restraint,) to prepare a Capital
Stall in the Church or Chappel where he design’d to hear Service,
to the Honour of the Sovereign; in which should be set up the Arms
of the _Order_ within a _Garter_; and also to erect another Stall,
as far in distance (according to the proportion of the said Church
or Chappel,) from the Stall of the Sovereign, as is the absent
Knights Stall in the Castle of _Windsor_, and therein place his own
Arms: And should wear the whole Habit of the _Order_, and hear
Divine Service, such as the Church ordained for the said time; as
well on the Eve and Morning, as on the Afternoon on the Feast Day.
He is likewise to do Reverence towards the _Altar_, in the Honour
of God, and after towards the Stall erected for the Sovereign, at
his coming in and going out of the said Church or Chappel, and, as
often as he should pass before the said Stall. But Emperors, Kings,
Princes, or Electors, are excepted, who may place their Seats and
Stalls as they think fitting.

This Decree is still in full force, and we shall only further observe,
that it has been usual for the absent Knight to perform the same
Ceremonies as near as may be to what is observed at _Windsor_, and to
be attended with a convenient Number of Gentlemen before him, well
habited, with the Officers of his Houshold, _&c._ who, according to
their Degrees, proceed two and two together bare-headed; and that he
Dines and Sups alone at all times, unless a _Knight-Companion_ be with
him.


            _How it is to be observed in Case of Sickness._

§ 2. In Case of Sickness, if the absent Knight was only confin’d to his
Chamber, the Custom was to prepare a Capital Stall for the Sovereign,
in the Chamber where he lay, and another Stall for himself, placed
according to the before-mentioned directions, to remain during the
Feast; in which Room Divine Offices were celebrated. And if the absent
Knight was so Sick as to keep his Bed, then his whole Habit of the
_Order_ was laid thereon; and upon this Account _Ambrose_, Earl of
_Warwick_, falling Ill at _Greenwich_, when St. _George_’s _Day_ was
there celebrated, _Anno_ 30 _Eliz._ retir’d to his Chamber, and sat in
his Robes.


    _In what manner the Feast hath been observ’d by absent Knights._

§ 3. Of this, the _Black-Book_ of the _Order_ gives a very considerable
Precedent; Namely, the Feast of St. _George_ held at the Palace of
_Hereford_, by Prince _Arthur_, 15 _Hen._ VII. being then in his
Government of the Principality of _Wales_; and had with him Sir
_Richard Pool_, one of the _Knights-Companions_; where every thing,
according to the form of the _Statutes_, was duly observed. The
Prince’s Sword was born before his Stall, and the Service performed by
his _Herald_ with great exactness. Likewise the Sovereign’s _Herald_
stood all the while before the Sovereign’s Stall, which was adorned
with accustomed Ornaments; and the Bishop, who performed Divine
Service, had his Seat erected near the High _Altar_.

There are other Instances, as particularly those observed by Sir _Henry
Sidney_, at _Shrewsbury_ and _Ludlow_, 23 and 24 Queen _Eliz._ which
were very remarkable.

As to the observation of the Feast, by a Knight beyond Sea, there is an
Instance in _Robert_, Earl of _Leicester_, Lieutenant for Queen
_Elizabeth_, Governor, and Captain General of the united Provinces, and
there celebrated the Feast, 1586. He had an Escutcheon of the _Order_,
impailed with the Sovereign’s Arms, fixt to the front of his House, so
also to the back of her Stall in the Church, and his own Arms at the
back of his own Stall.

He proceeded on Horse-back to the Church, a Pursuivant riding before
him, wearing a King of Arms’s Coat; who, after Sermon, proceeded before
him to the Offering; which he made for the Sovereign and himself;
Service being ended, he returned to his Lodging, and dined with great
Solemnity.


            _Dispensations for Absence granted during Life._

§ 5. Sometimes Dispensations for Absence have been obtained for Life,
upon the Petite of the _Knights-Companions_ setting forth their Age and
Infirmity: An Instance of which, we find was granted to the Lord
_Dacrees_, 26 _Hen._ VIII. and the Earl of _Derby_, 14 _Car._ I. and
the Lord _Musgrave_; but both with this Restriction; that the absent
should be obliged to send to _Garter_ for his Escutcheons, at the same
time that he sent his Excuse, and Petite for Dispensation; and should
solemnly keep in his own House the Feast, with all the sacred Rites and
Ceremonies, in his Robes, and other Ornaments, if Health permit; and in
Case of Sickness, upon his Bed, according to the ancient _Statutes_.

This Act was thought of so great Importance to be observed, that the
Chancellor was ordered to transcribe it, and send it to each of the
_Knights-Companions_; acquainting them at the same time, with the
Penalties they should be liable to, if they neglected the least
Punctilio. And the like was again observed, and repeated to them,
before the Feast of the ensuing Year.




                               CAP. XXIV.

                _The Degradation of a_ Knight-Companion.


§ 1. The Ensigns of the _Order_ are not to be withdrawn from a Knight,
during Life, unless Guilty of some of those Marks of Reproach, set down
in King _Henry_ VIII’s _Statutes_, _viz._ Heresy, Treason, or Flying
from Battle: It has sometimes been found, that Prodigality has been
made a fourth Point, where a Knight has so wasted his Estate, as to be
incapable of supporting his Dignity. The Pretence for divesting
_William_, Lord _Paget_, 6 _Edw._ VI. was, his not being a Gentleman of
Blood, both by Father and Mother. But Felony comes not within the
compass of this _Statute_, as not being expresly mentioned among the
Reproaches there Summ’d up; and so it was adjudged in a _Chapter_, 14
_Jac._ I. in the Case of _Robert_, Earl of _Somerset_, then lately
condemned for that Fact, whereon his Hatchments were not removed.

When a _Knight-Companion_ is found Guilty of any of the Offences
mentioned in King _Henry_ VIII’s _Statutes_, he is usually degraded
at the next _Chapter_, of which the Sovereign gives the
_Knights-Companions_ previous notice; and then commands _Garter_ to
attend such of them as are appointed to go to the Convict Knight,
who, in a solemn manner, first takes from him the _George_ and
_Ribbond_, and then his _Garter_. And at the ensuing Feast of St.
_George_, or sooner, if the Sovereign appoint it, publication of his
Crimes and Degradation is made by _Garter_.

Next, _Garter_, by Warrant to that purpose, takes down his
Atchievement, on which Service he is vested in his Coat of Arms, and
the Officers of Arms standing about him, the _Black-Rod_ also present;
First _Garter_ reads aloud the Instruments of Degradation, after which
one of the _Heralds_, who is placed ready on a Ladder set to the back
of the Convict Knight’s Stall, at the Words _expelled, and put from
among the Arms_, takes his Crest, and violently casts it down into the
_Choir_, after that his Banner and Sword; and when the Publication is
read out, all the Officers of Arms spurn the Atchievements out of the
_Choir_, into the Body of the Church, first the Sword, then the Banner,
and last of all the Crest, so out of the West Door, thence to the
Bridge, and over into the Ditch; and thus it was done at the
Degradation of _Edward_, Duke of _Buckingham_, 13 _Hen._ VIII. Their
Plates are likewise taken down from their Stalls and carried away.

Degradation not being alone thought sufficient, it was debated
in _Chapter_, 32 _Hen._ VIII. whether the Names of such
_Knights-Companions_ as were convicted of Treason should remain in the
_Registers_, or be razed out: Where the Sovereign determined; That
wheresoever the Actions or Names of such Offenders should be found,
these Words [_Vah Proditor_] should be Written in the Margin; by which
means the _Register_ wou’d be preserved fair, and not defaced with
razures or blots.

In the close of this Section we may observe, that some
_Knights-Companions_, who have suffered Degradation, have lived to be
restored thereto; being re-elected, and re-invested, and their
Atchievements set up again, by the Indulgence of the next Reign; as
were the Lord _Paget_’s, 1 _Mar._ and the Marquiss of _Northampton_, 1
_Eliz._ as likewise the Duke of _Norfolk_, 1 _Mar._




                               CAP. XXV.

             _Honours paid to deceased_ Knights-Companions.


1. As to the first part of this Section, the celebrating Masses for
defunct _Knights-Companions_, I think it very little material here;
that Ceremony altering with the Form of Religion, became wholly
disused, 32 _Hen._ VIII. at which time, in a _Chapter_ then held at
_Westminster_, the following Decree was made.

_That everyone of the_ Knights-Companions, _in lieu of the said Masses,
should, for the future, after the Death of any of their Brethren,
according to the Rates of their Degrees hereafter mentioned, and
immediately upon Demand of the_ Register, _and Dean of_ Windsor, _or
one of them, pay the several Sums following._


                                      _l._ _s._ _d._
                   The Sovereign       8    06   8
                   A Stranger King     6    08   4
                   The Prince          5    16   8
                   A Duke              5    00   0
                   A Marquiss          3    16   0
                   An Earl             2    10   0
                   A Viscount          1    01   8
                   A Baron             1    13   4
                   A Knight-Batchelor  0    16   8


The Monies so collected, (called _Obiit Monies_) were by the said
Decree appointed to be distributed in Alms-Deeds, _as the Reparation of
High Ways_, _the Relief of the Poor, &c._ The receipt and disbursements
of these Sums were committed to the care of the Dean and Register.

Mr. _Ashmole_, has made this addition in his Library, which it will not
be out of our way to observe, for the information of those who may be
desirous to know how the Point then stood; that not withstanding the
aforesaid Order in _Chapter_, made the 24th of _May_, _Anno_ 32 _Hen._
VIII. for changing the Number of Masses usually Sung for defunct
Knights, into a pecuniary Rate, according their degrees; the Prayers
for Souls departed, both by private Persons, as also by the Clergy, in
Masses and Exequies; nay farther, to give Alms to others, and to pray
for them, was continued by the Church of _England_ several Years beyond
that space; for in a Book, entituled the _Institution of a Christian
Man, &c._ made by the Clergy of _England_, as appears by the
Subscriptions of the Archbishops, Bishops, and others of the Clergy to
the Preface; dedicated by them to King _Henry_ VIII. and printed by
_Thomas Bartelet_, the King’s Printer, _Anno_ 1537. _cum Privilegio_,
the Article of Purgatory is there set down.

But to proceed. This charitable distribution, in a _Chapter_ held at
_Greenwich_, 5 _Edw._ VI. was enlarged to the relief of the Poor in the
Town of _Windsor_, and other Towns, Villages, and Places, at the
discretion of the Dean of _Windsor_. And though the said Decree was
confirmed by King _Edward_ VI. Queen _Mary_, and Queen _Elizabeth_, yet
for many Years, the Collection of these _Obiit_ Monies was neglected;
till in 9 _Car._ I. the Earl of _Portland_, out of his great
Generosity, as well as his Zeal for restoring so pious a Work,
reiterated to the Sovereign the ancient Decrees made in this Case.
Whereupon it passed in _Chapter_, that the same should be revived, and
for ever continued; and that the same should begin for the five
Knights, whose Atchievements were offered at that Feast, _viz._ the
King of _Sweden_, the Elector Palatine, the Earls of _Northumberland_,
_Banbury_, and _Rutland_. And as to Stranger Princes, it pleased the
Sovereign to express himself, _That as by the_ Statutes _they are left_
to perform these Payments by themselves, if they wou’d; so, if it were
not done by them, that both then, and for the future, the same should
be paid by the Sovereign himself.

Afterwards, all the Sums of Money, to be collected by Virtue of this
Decree, together with the _Knights-Companions_ Duties, at their first
Entrance in the _Order_, were employed toward providing Plate for the
_Altar_, within St. _George_’s _Chappel_, which is already treated of.


       _Of fixing on the Stalls Plates of their Arms and Stiles._

§ 2. The next thing provided for by the _Statutes_ of Institution, was
the deceased Knight’s Honour; in regard of which, it was ordained,
_That when any one of the first Founders should die, there should be in
Metal an Escutcheon of his Arms, with his Helm, or Crest, fastened at
the back of his Stall, for a Mark of Honour to him that bore them_. And
in like manner, _that their Successors should have a like Escutcheon
fixed on the back of their Stalls_; and to difference them from those
of the first Founders, they were appointed to be made somewhat less,
and to be placed a little underneath them. But this Article relates
only to the _Knights-Companions_, not to the Sovereigns of the _Order_;
nor do we find that any of them had Plates of their Arms and Stiles set
upon the back of their Stalls, in manner as is before prescribed to the
rest of the _Knights-Companions_.

King _Henry_ VIII. in his Body of _Statutes_, alters this Article in
three particulars; first, as to the setting up their Plates, which he
appoints not to be after their Deaths, but within, after the
Installation of every _Knight-Companion_; secondly, as to the nature of
the Metal, that it may be such as the Knight shall please himself: And
lastly, as to the size, though he also restrains the _Knights-Subjects_
to a lesser than those of the first Founders; yet he gives liberty to
the _Knights-Strangers_ to use their Plates and Fashions at Pleasure.
As to the first of these, it has been pretty duly observed; and indeed
the second, of making them of Copper; but the last, _viz._ the size,
has been very little regarded; for the very Plates of those Knights who
were soon after installed, and thence downwards, are larger than those
of the first Founders.

In tract of time, many of these Memorials were, by sacrilegious Hands,
taken away, which King _Charles_ I. taking notice of, and desirous to
put a stop to a Mischief not in his Power to prevent, and to preserve
the Remembrance of the precedent _Knights-Companions_; commanded the
Dean of _Windsor_ to describe the Stiles of those that remained in a
Book, which he accordingly did, and deposited the same in the College:
But what became of this Book, could not be afterwards discovered; so
that the most that could be done, was to draw the Arms, and Copy out
the Stiles, engraven on the Plates then remaining; from whence the
following Observations may be made.

First, That for many Years after the Institution of the _Order_, the
Plate whereon the Shield was engraved, bore no other Inscription, than
the deceased Knight’s Name, set at the Foot thereof, under the
Escutcheon of his Arms. Afterwards, the chief Title of Honour began to
be added, though now and then, in the first and elder times, both were
omitted, as also their Crests. But about the beginning of King _Henry_
VIII’s Reign, not only the Knight’s chief Title, but all other his
Titles and Dignities, whether Honorary, or Officiary, were drawn
together in one Inscription, concluding with that of Knight of this
most Noble _Order_; and which, about the same time, the
_Knights-Companions_ used to insert, in all their publick and private
Instruments of Writing; a Custom observed by the Knights of other
Sovereigns _Orders_ Abroad.

At first the _Knights-Companions_ gave their Paternal Coats of Arms,
singly and without any Quarterings; but toward the beginning of _Hen._
V. they began to add their Quarterings, as appears from the Escutcheons
of _Hugh_, Lord _Burnel_, who died 9 _Hen._ V. Sir _Lewis Robessart_,
and others. Yet was not the same generally used, but left to the
Pleasure of the _Knights-Companions_.

But of later times, this very thing was thought of such concern, that
where a Knight has been elected, who wanted Quarterings, the Sovereign
has been pleased to grant him another Coat of Arms, to quarter with his
Paternal Coat; that his Banner, which ought to hang over his Stall,
might not seem too naked.

Soon after King _Henry_ VIII’s Accession, the Knights compassed their
Shields with the Royal _Garter_, and thereon (such as were Noblemen)
placed the Coronet belonging to their Dignity. As to Supporters, we
observe two Places to which they are added; the one of _John Beaufort_,
the first Duke of _Somerset_ of that Name, elected 20 _Hen._ VI. the
other of _Anthony Widvile_, Earl _Rivers_, elected 5 _Edw._ IV. and
besides these, till the Reign of King _Henry_ VIII. there is not
another Example: But then it grew into common usage, as also the
ingraving their peculiar Motto’s, or Devices upon the Plates.


                    _The Offering of Atchievements._

§ 3. A third Honour paid to the defunct Knight, is a most solemn
Offering up his Atchievements at the High _Altar_; namely, the Banner
of his Arms, his Sword, Helmet, and Crest, with its Mantlings; all
which had been set up over his Stall at his Installation. The Ceremony
of Offering these Ensigns does not appear to have been regulated at the
Institution of the _Order_, but rather added as an additional Honour,
by King _Henry_ V. and the manner thereof set down in the fourteenth
Article of his Body of _Statutes_.

This Solemnity is local to the Chappel of St. _George_, within the
Castle of _Windsor_, and not to be performed till the Sovereign has
notice of the _Knight-Companion’s_ Death.

In 1 _Edw._ VI. at the Feast then held at _Windsor_, there arose a
Question, whether the Atchievements of King _Henry_ VIII. which yet
hung over the Sovereign’s Stall, should be taken down and offered at
the Mass of _Requiem_ ensuing, or not? in regard his Banner, Sword,
Helm, and Crest, with Mantles, had been offered up before, at his
Interment within that Chappel. In conclusion of which it was
determined, _That the said Atchievements shou’d not again be offered,
but remain over the Sovereign’s Stall, for his Son King_ Edward VI. But
when the Sovereigns of this most Noble _Order_ are not interred at
_Windsor_, then their Atchievements are offered up the next ensuing
Feast; as were those of Queen _Elizabeth_, which the _Blue-Book_ notes
to be done at Morning Prayer.

As to the time for performing this Ceremony, it was ordained to be on
the Morrow after the Feast, when the Mass was Sung for the Souls of the
_Knights-Companions_, _&c._ and so was duly observed till the time of
the Reformation, when the Mass of _Requiem_ being abolished, it was
nevertheless at the Morning Service, on the Morrow immediately after
the Offertory: But after Queen _Elizabeth_ had removed the Feast of St.
_George_ from _Windsor_, this Solemnity was frequently dispatched in
one Day, before they went out of the _Choir_; and the ancient Rule, as
to the time, being thus broke, was never after restored, but generally
performed the very same Morning wherein the elect Knights were
installed: And though the Day was thus changed, yet the Ceremony it
self was not performed till after the Installation was finished, that
Solemnity having always the Precedency, till 9 _Jac._ I. when he
observing how incongruous it seemed, to instal a new Knight before his
Predecessor had been fully discharged of his Stall, gave Order for
Offering the Atchievements of Sir _Henry Lea_, the Lord _Scroop_, and
others, before the Instalment of the elect Knights.

Not long after, it was thought convenient to perform this Ceremony on
the Eve of the Feast, presently after the first _Vespers_ began; and
next to proceed with the Installations; whereby, as much as possible,
the Stalls of the _Knights-Companions_ might be supplied, in all the
rest of the Solemnities of the Feast. But if at any time, any of the
new elect Knights were introduced into the _Choir_, before the Offering
of the Atchievements began, they were appointed to stand there under
the Stalls designed for them till that Ceremony was finished.

Thus it continued from the said 9 _Jac._ I. till the 15 _Car._ II. when
it was performed at the time anciently accustomed for it; the Prince of
_Denmark_, and the Duke of _Monmouth_, being both installed before the
first _Vespers_ began, and the Atchievements of the defunct Knights not
offered till the Morrow after the Feast Day.

As to the Manner and Order of this Ceremony, among other Institutions
of King _Henry_ V. it is appointed, _That as often as, through the
vacancy of any Stall, the Swords, Helms, with the rest of the defunct
Knights, ought to be offered, the Sword of the deceased Knight shall be
first offered, being carried up to the_ High Altar _by two of the_
Knights-Companions, _and afterwards the Helm, with the Crest and
Mantlings, by two other_ Knights-Companions; _and this Offering is to
be made for them, in the Order they were installed, not as they died_.

But of the Offering of a defunct Knight’s Banner, we find no express
mention till 18 _Hen._ VII. at which time the Banner of the Lord
_Brook_ was offered: But afterwards the direction for Offering their
Ensign and Banner was taken into King _Henry_ VIII’s Body of
_Statutes_. And since the same were introduced, according to the
foregoing Precedent, it was to be offered first, and so hath been
generally observed.

By the appointment of the _Statutes_ of _Henry_ V. the Sovereign is to
nominate and assign the _Knights-Companions_, who are severally to
perform this Ceremony; and so is the direction in _Henry_ VIII’s
_Statutes_: But since the beginning of Queen _Elizabeth_’s Reign, the
Knights have generally proceeded to this Offering, according to their
Seniority; and when the Course ended, then the _Seniors_ began again.
There are likewise many Examples where the Sovereign’s Lieutenant has
joined in the Ceremony to assist the other Knights: Nor is a Proxy, or
Deputy, to be admitted to perform any part of the Ceremony, though in
the Offering of Money he ought.

We shall next proceed to the Duties of the Prelate of the _Order_, the
Prebends, and Officers of Arms, as their Services severally, or
jointly, relate to the performance of this Ceremony. First then, the
Prelate, and two Prebends, ought to proceed up to the _Altar_,
immediately before _Garter_ summons down the _Knights-Companions_ to
the Offering; and there stand ready to receive the Atchievements, as
they are severally offered up.

It is next the Duty of the _Provincial Kings_, and _Heralds_, to
conduct the _Knights-Companions_, when they proceed up to the _Altar_,
bearing any part of the defunct Knight’s Atchievements. The whole
Ceremony is briefly thus.

First _Garter_ rises from his Seat, and proceeds into the middle of the
_Choir_, where, after his usual Obeysances, he summons the
_Knights-Companions_ to descend, who come down and place themselves
before their Stalls: Whereupon _Clarenceux_ and _Norroy_ (or in the
absence of either, the _Senior Herald_, or of both, of the two eldest
_Heralds_,) pass down from the Steps of the _Altar_ into the Body of
the _Choir_; in the interim _Garter_ takes the _Banner_ of the eldest
defunct Knight, and presents it, half rolled up, to the two _Senior
Knights-Companions_; the two _Provincial Kings_ by this time
approaching them, make their double Reverences, and after to the other
_Knights-Companions_, and then stand a little aside; while the two
_Senior_ Knights, having taken the _Banner_ between them, make their
double Reverence, and pass up to the _Altar_, (preceeded by the Kings)
bearing it with the lower end of the Staff foremost, and at the first
_Haut-Pas_ make another double Reverence. The _Provincial Kings_ being
arrived at the uppermost _Haut-Pas_, after an humble Obeysance, divide
themselves to make way for the Knights to Offer, who forthwith raise
the Point of the _Banner_ upwards, and after a single Reverence toward
the _Altar_, present it upon their Knees, to the Prelate of the
_Order_, who delivers it to two Canons, and they deposite it upon
Cushions laid before the _Altar_. This done, the two _Provincial Kings_
conduct the Knights back into the _Choir_, who, with the usual
Reverences, retire to their Stations, under (not to) their Stalls, and
the _Provincial Kings_ to their, on either side the _Altar_.

Next the two _Senior Heralds_ pass down into the _Choir_, as the
_Provincial Kings_ did, whilst _Garter_, taking up the Sword, presents
it to the two next _Senior_ Knights, who proceed to the _Altar_ with
the two _Heralds_ before them, in the same Order as before, bearing the
Sword between them, and offer the same with the Pommel or Hilt upwards,
and then retire as before.

In the next place, the two next _Senior Heralds_ go down as before, and
the _Helm_ and _Crest_ is offered in the like manner: But the
_Pursuivants_ at _Arms_ do no part of this Duty.

Heretofore we find that _Garter_ has not only begun this Solemnity, by
presenting the _Banner_, but has also conducted the two _Senior_
Knights to the _Altar_, as he did 5 _Eliz._ by the _Banner_ of the Lord
_Grey_; and at some other times. It was likewise the usage heretofore
for the Prelate to deliver the offered Atchievements, to some of the
_Heralds_, to be deposited near the _Altar_.

There is nothing on this farther observable, than what relates to the
Atchievement it self, which, as they became by this Ceremony part of
the Goods of the Chappel, and included within the Words of the
_Statutes_ of the College, whereby the Sovereign granted to the Dean
and Canons all Oblations, they could not be sold or alienated, and were
therefore deposited by them in the _Chapter-House_: But the _Helms_ and
_Swords_, because they were at first forged for the Service of War, of
an extraordinary large size, have been frequently redeemed, that they
might serve again to the same uses. And likewise, because it belongs to
_Garter_ to provide Atchievements for new installed Knights, he usually
hath compounded with the Dean and Canons for the defunct Knight’s
Atchievements.


  _Of depositing the deceased Knights_ Mantles _in the_ Chapter-House.

$ 4. In 9 _Eliz._ there passed a Decree, _That the_ Knights-Companions
_should be bound by their Oaths, to take care, by their last Will, that
after their Decease, all their Ornaments, which they had receiv’d,
should be restored, the Robes to the College, and the Jewels to the
King that gave them_. Sir _Christopher Hatton_ complied with the
Decree, and sent his _Mantle_ accordingly; but that of Sir _Henry Lea_,
being left to the disposal of others, and not sent to the College,
happened at length to come into the Hands of Brokers, and was openly
exposed to Sale in _Long-lane_, to the great dishonour of the _Order_.

This Decree was in after times but slackly observed, and therefore in a
_Chapter_ held at _Windsor_, 4 _Car._ I. the Knights were admonished,
_That when the Sovereign should vouchsafe to bestow the_ Mantle _of
the_ Order, _the Knight should take care at his Death, to have it sent
to the Chappel at_ Windsor, according to the _Statutes_. But this
taking little Effect, the Sovereign thought fit to restore vigorously
the Law in this particular, by a Decree in _Chapter_, 13 _Car._ I.
which obliged all _Knights-Companions_, receiving the Ensigns of the
_Order_ from the Sovereign, to take care, according to the tenor of
their Oaths, that these, together with the Book of _Statutes_, should
be restored in the Hands of the Sovereign, after their Deaths; and a
Command was therewithal given, _That certain_ Books, Mantles, _and_
Surcoats, _then lying at_ White-Hall, _shou’d be delivered to the_
Register _of the_ Order, _to be laid up at_ Windsor, _in honourable
Memory of those to whom they belonged_.

In Observation of these Decrees, where the _Habit_ and _Ensigns_ of the
_Order_ were either wholly, or in part, bestowed by the Sovereign,
Order was taken, at the Decease of such _Knights-Companions_, to send
for them in again. As at a _Chapter_ held 15 _Car._ I. the _Garter_ and
_George_ of the Lord Treasurer _Weston_ being sent back, were presented
to the Sovereign; and after delivered to the _Dean_ and _Chapter_ of
_Windsor_, to be preserved: And in the same _Chapter_ it was ordered,
that the Earl of _Kelly_’s Robes and Ornaments of the _Order_, should
be sent for by the Chancellor.

These former Decrees were yet thought needful to be confirm’d by King
_Charles_ II. so that in a _Chapter_ held 1669. at _White-Hall_, it was
Decreed, _That the Mantle of each_ Knight-Companion, _with the Book of_
Statutes, should be sent to _Windsor_, immediately after their Deaths;
_and that the Chancellor of the_ Order _should be obliged, by Letters
to their Heirs and Executors, to put them in mind of sending them
thither_. But it is to be understood, that where the Mantle has been
provided at the Knight’s own Charge, there is no obligation for
returning them.

Thus I have run through all the Particulars, relating to the
Institutions, Laws, and Ceremonies, of this most Noble _Order_; I shall
in the last Place proceed to give a List of all those who have enjoyed
this singular Mark of Honour from its first Foundation. The Motives
which excited the Royal Founder to set on Foot the said _Order_, are
already particularly treated of; who having established _Rules_ and
_Statutes_ for the Government, and regulation thereof, he next resolved
to elect, from among the Flower of his own Wars, twenty five of the
most celebrated Knights, who, together with himself, should make up the
Number of Twenty six; for of so many does the _Order_ by his
Appointment consist: And indeed that Age plentifully furnished him with
Men of the most brave and celebrated Characters, and of signal
Reputation in Arms, raised by the eminent Wars of those times, and
justly distinguished by their own heroick Actions.

The first that he elected into this Noble _Order_, was _Edward_, his
eldest Son, who already in part deserved, and afterwards justly
obtained the Title of a Brave and Martial Prince, of whom our Histories
speak so largely. The rest of his accomplished Collegues, were these
that follow, and are thus placed in their Stalls.




                               CAP. XXVI.

      _A List of the Founders, and Catalogue of their Successors,
                         to the present time._


 ================================+==================================
 1 _The Sovereign                |   2 Edward _Prince
 King_ Edward _III._             |       of_ Wales.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 3 Henry, _Duke of_ Lancast.     |   4 Th. Beauchamp, _E._ War.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 5 Piers Capitow de la Bouch.    |   6 Ralph Stafford, _E._ Staff.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 7 W. Montacute, _E. Salisb._    |   8 Rog. Mortimer, _E._ March.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 9 _Sir_ John Lysle.             |  10 _Sir_ Barthol. Burghersh.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 11 _Sir_ John Beauchamp.        |  12 _Sir_ John Mohun.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 13 _Sir_ Hugh Courteney.        |  14 _Sir_ Thomas Holland.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 15 _Sir_ John Grey.             |  16 _Sir_ Richard Fitz Simon.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 17 _Sir_ Miles Stapleton.       |  18 _Sir_ Thomas Wale.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 19 _Sir_ Hugh Wrotesley.        |  20 _Sir_ Nele Loring.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 21 _Sir_ John Chandos.          |  22 _Sir_ James Audeley.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 23 _Sir_ Otho Holland.          |  24 _Sir_ Henry Eam.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------
 25 _Sir_ Sanchet Daubrichcourt. |  26 _Sir_ Walter Paveley.
 --------------------------------+----------------------------------


_A Catalogue of their Successors, with the Blazoning of their Arms,
  corrected in above sixty Errors, in the Plates engrav’d in_ Ashmole.

     _Knights afterwards elected in the Reign of King_ Edward III.

27. Richard _of_ Bordeaux, _afterwards King of_ England; _of that Name
  the second_.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a Label of three Points Argent
    on the middlemost, a Cross of St. George._

28. Lionel _of_ Antwerp, _Earl of_ Ulster, _and Duke of_ Clarence.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, on a Label of three Points
    Argent, as many Cantons Gules._

29. John _of_ Gaunt, _Duke of_ Lancaster, _after created Duke of_
  Acquitaine.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a Label of three Points
    Ermine._

30. Edmund _of_ Langley, _Earl of_ Cambridge, _after Duke of_ York.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, on a Label of three Points
    Argent and nine Torteauxes._

31. John de Montford, _Duke of_ Bretagne, _and Earl of_ Richmond.

  _Plain Ermine._

32. William de Bohun, _Earl of_ Hereford.

  _Azure a bend Argent between two Cottises, and six Lyons rampant Or._

33. William de Bohun, _Earl of_ Northampton.

  _Azure on a bend Argent, cottized between six Lyons rampant Or, three
    Mullets Gules._

34. John Hastings, _Earl of_ Pembroke.

  _Or a manch Gules._

35. Thomas Beauchamp, _Earl of_ Warwick.

  _Gules a fess between six cross Croslets Or._

36. Richard Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel _and_ Surrey.

  _Gules a Lyon rampant Or._

37. Robert Ufford, _Earl of_ Suffolk.

  _Sable a Cross ingrailed Or._

38. Hugh Stafford, _Earl of_ Stafford.

  _Or a chevron Gules._

39. Ingelram de Coucy, _Earl of_ Bedford.

  _Barry of six Vair and Gules._

40. Guiscard d’Angoulesme, _Earl of_ Huntingdon.

  _Or billetty a Lyon rampant Azure._

41. Edward Spencer, _Lord_ Spencer.

  _Quarterly Argent and Gules, in the second and third a fret Or, over
    all a bend Sable._

42. William Latimer, _Lord_ Latimer.

  _Gules a Cross patonce Or._

43. Reynold Cobham, _Lord_ Cobham _of_ Sterborough.

  _Gules on a Chevron Or three Estoils Sable._

44. John Nevil, _Lord_ Nevil _of_ Raby.

  _Gules a Saltire Argent._

45. Ralph Basset, _Lord_ Basset _of_ Drayton.

  _Or three Piles Gules a Canton Ermin._

46. _Sir_ Walter Manny Banneret.

  _Or three Chevrons Sable_, to which King _Edward_ III. added an
    augmentation of a _Lyon Passant gardant Or, placed on the uppermost
    Chevron_.

47. _Sir_ William Fitz Warin, _Kt._

  _Quarterly per fess indented Ermine and Gules._

48. _Sir_ Thomas Ufford, _Kt._

  _Sable a Cross ingrailed Or with his difference._

49. _Sir_ Thomas Felton, _Kt._

  _Gules two Lyons passant in pale Ermine crowned Or._

50. _Sir_ Francis Van Hale, _Kt._

  _Gules within a bordure cousu Azure enurny verdoy of Lyons rampant
    and Flower Deluces, a Wyvern or bifooted Dragon rising and crowned
    all Or, charged on the breast with an inescochion, of the first
    therein a double headed Eagle displaid Gold._

51. _Sir_ Fulk Fitz Warrin, _Kt._

  _Quarterly per fess indented Argent and Gules._

52. _Sir_ Allan Boxhull, _Kt._

  _Or a Lyon rampant queve fourche Azure frettee Argent._

53. _Sir_ Richard Pembruge, _Kt._

  _Barry of eight Or and Azure._

54. Sir Thomas Wreigt, _Kt._

  _Gules on a Cross patonce Or, five mullets of the Field._

55. _Sir_ Thomas Banester, _Kt._

  _Argent a Cross patonce Sable._

56. _Sir_ Richard de la Vache, _Kt._

  _Gules three Lyons rampant Argent crowned Or._

57. _Sir_ Guy de Bryan, _Kt._

  _Or three Piles Azure._


          _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Richard _II._

58. Thomas _of_ Woodstock, _Earl of_ Buckingham, _after Duke of_
  Gloucester.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a bordure Argent._

59. Henry _of_ Lancaster, (_or_ Bolinbroke,) _Earl of_ Darby,
  _afterwards King of_ England; _of that Name the fourth._

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 29.

60. William, _Duke of_ Gelderland.

  _Parti per pale Or and Azure, two Lyons rampant combatant and
    counter-changed._

61. William _of_ Bavaria, _Earl of_ Ostrevant, _after Earl of_ Holland,
  Henault, _and_ Zeland.

  _Quarterly the first and fourth Or, a Lyon rampant Sable, the second
    and third Or, a Lyon rampant Gules_, i. e. Flanders _and_ Hainault.

62. Thomas Holland, _Earl of_ Kent, _after Duke of_ Surry.

  _England a border Argent_, to which the King in Augmentation gave him
    King _Edward_ the Confessor’s, _viz. Azure a Cross patonce between
    five martlets Or_, to be impaled before his own aforesaid, assumed
    from his Grandmother of the House of _Plantagenet Woodstock_.
    _Vide_ among the Founders.

63. John Holland, _Earl of_ Huntingdon, _after Duke of_ Exeter.

  _England a border of France_, as descended maternally from
    _Plantagenet Woodstock_.

64. Thomas Mowbray, _Earl of_ Nottingham, _after Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _England a Label of five Points Argent_, his maternal Grandmother’s
    Arms _Plantagenet_ of _Brotherton_, his own Arms was _Gules a Lyon
    rampant Argent_.

65. Edward, _Earl of_ Rutland, _after Duke of_ Albemarle,

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 30.

66. Michael de la Pole, _Earl of_ Suffolk.

  _Azure a Fess between three Leopards Faces Or._

67. William Scroop, _Lord_ Scroop, _after Earl of_ Wiltshire, _and Lord
  Treasurer of_ England.

  _Azure a bend Or, a Label of three Points Argent with difference_,
    being of the _Masham_ Line.

68. William Beauchamp, _Lord_ Bergavenny.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 35. _with a Crescent difference_.

69. John Beaumont, _Lord_ Beaumont.

  _France a Lyon rampant Or._

70. William Willoughby, _Lord_ Willoughby.

  _Quarterly Ufford and Beke_, viz. _Sable a Cross ingrailed Or, and
    Gules a Cross moline Argent_, his Grandmother _Ufford_’s Arms, his
    own proper Coat being _Or fretty Azure_.

71. Richard Grey, _Lord_ Grey.

  _Barry of six Argent and Azure, a Label of five Points Gules._

72. _Sir_ Nicholas Sarnesfield, _Kt._

  _Azure an Eagle displaid Or, crowned Argent, potius Argent crowned
    Or._

73. _Sir_ Philip de la Vache, _Kt._

  _Comme_, No. 56.

74. _Sir_ Robert Knolls, _Kt._

  _Gules on a Chevron Argent, three Roses of the first._

75. _Sir_ John Sulby, _Kt._

  _Ermine four barrs Gules._

76. _Sir_ Lewis Clifford, _Kt._

  _Checquy Or and Azure a fess Gules, potius a bend Gules._

77. _Sir_ Simon Burley, _Kt._

  _Or three barrs Sable in chief, two Pallets of the second, in
    pretence Hussey_, viz. _Gules with three bars Ermine._

78. _Sir_ John d’Evereux, _Kt._

  _Gules a fess Argent in chief, three Plates._

79. _Sir_ Richard Burley, _Kt._

  _Comme_, No. 77.

80. _Sir_ Bryan Stapleton, _Kt._

  _Argent a Lyon rampant Sable, on his Shoulder an annulet diff._

81. _Sir_ Peter Courtney, _Kt._

  _Or three Torteauxes, on a Label of three Points Azure, nine Plates._

82. _Sir_ John Burley, _Kt._

  _Comme_, No. 79.

83. _Sir_ John Bourchier, _Kt._

  _Argent a Cross ingrailed Gules, between four water budgets Sable._

84. _Sir_ Thomas Granston, _Kt._

  _Paly of six Argent and Azure, on a bend Gules, three escallops Or._

85. _Sir_ Robert Dunstavil, _Kt._

  _Argent a fret Gules and Border ingrailed Sable, over all on a
    Canton, of the second a Lyon passant Or._

86. _Sir_ Robert de Namur, _Kt._

  _Or a Lyon rampant Sable, suppressed by a Batime Gules._

87. _Sir_ Sandich de Frane, _Kt._ alias vocat Sanchet la Towre.

  _Or a Lyon rampant quevee fourchee Gules._


            _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Henry IV.

88. Henry, _Prince of_ Wales, _after King of_ England, _of that Name
  the fifth_.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a Label of three Points
    Argent._

89. Thomas _of_ Lancaster, _Earl of_ Albemarle, _and Duke of_ Clarence,
  _Brother to Prince_ Henry.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, on a Label Argent, three
    cantons Gules at the Label Ermine_ as his Grandfather, No. 29. but
    charged with _Cantons_.

90. John, _Earl of_ Kendal, _and Duke of_ Bedford, _after Regent of_
  France, _another Brother to Prince_ Henry.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a Label of five Points per
    pale Ermine, and Azure semi de liz Or._

91. Humphry, _Earl of_ Pembrook, _and after Duke of_ Exeter.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a border Argent._

92. Thomas Beaufort, _Earl of_ Dorset, _and after Duke of_ Exeter.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a border gobone Ermine and
    Azure, in every piece of the second a Flower Deluce Or._

       ---------------------------------------------------------

_N. B. Sir_ Thomas Percy, _Knight of the Garter, living_ 7 Rich. II.
_is mentioned by_ Ashmole, p. 213, _tho’ omitted in his and other
Catalogues_. _Or a Lyon rampant Azure._

93. Robert, _Count Palatine_, _Duke of_ Bavaria, _after Emperor of_
  Germany.

  _Quarterly Sable, a Lyon rampant crowned Or_, for the Palatinate,
    _and Paly bendy Argent and Azure_, Bavaria.

94. John Beaufort, _Earl of_ Somerset, _and Marquiss of_ Dorset.

  _Quarterly France ancient and England, a bord. gobone Argent and
    Azure._

95. Thomas Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 36.

96. Edmund Stafford, _Earl of_ Stafford.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 38.

97. Edmund Holland, _Earl of_ Kent.

  _England a border Argent._

98. Ralph Nevil, _Earl of_ Westmorland.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 44.

99. Gilbert Roos, _Lord_ Roos.

  _Gules three water budgets Argent._

100. Gilbert Talbot, _Lord_ Talbot.

  _Gules a Lyon rampant within a border ingrailed Or._

101. John Lovell, _Lord_ Lovell.

  _Barry nebulee of six Or and Gules._

102. Hugh Burnell, _Lord_ Burnell.

  _Argent a Lyon rampant Sable, crowned Or, a border Azure._

103. Thomas Morley, _Lord_ Morley.

  _Argent a Lyon rampant Sable crowned Or._

104. Edward Charleton, _Lord_ Powis.

  _Or a Lyon rampant Gules._

105. _Sir_ John Cornwall, _Kt._ _after Lord_ Fanhope.

  _Ermine a Lyon rampant Gules crowned Or, a bordet ingrailed Sable
    besanty._

106. _Sir_ William Arundel, _Kt._ _of the House of_ Fitz Alan.

  _Gules a Lyon rampant Or, a crescent difference._

107. _Sir_ John Stanley, _Kt._

  _Quarterly Argent and Or in the first, on a bend Azure, three Stags
    Heads Silver, in the second a chief indented as the third, charged
    with three Plates_, i. e. Stanley _and_ Latham.

108. _Sir_ Robert de Umfrevile, _Kt._

  _Gules Semi de cross Croslets a cinque foil Or, over all a bend
    ingrailed Argent._

109. _Sir_ Thomas Rampston, _Kt._

  _Argent a Chevron, and in the dexter chief Point a cinquefoile Sable._

111. _Sir_ Thomas Erpingham, _Kt._

  _Vert an inescocheon within eight Marlets, placed in Orle Argent._

Hitherto the Knights of this Noble Order are ranked, as placed in
divers other Catalogues, and according to their greatest Dignities,
because the certain Years of their Elections cannot be found; only we
have here removed Sir _John Sulbie_, and Sir _Sanchet de Trane_, from
the Reign of King _Henry_ IV. in which they are written in those old
Catalogues, to the Reign of King _Richard_ II. for it appears in
_Ashmole_, Page 213. that they were Knights of the _Garter_, 7 _Rich._
II. and we have a little varied the Places of the Knights in that Reign
following: The precedence in the Roll of Accounts of _Alan de Stoke_
that Year, who reciting twenty three of these _Knights-Companions_,
gives therein the preference to some of them after this manner; Sir
_Guy Bryan_, Sir _William Beauchamp_, Sir _Thomas Percy_, Sir _Nele
Loring_, Sir _John Sulby_, Sir _Lodowick Clifford_, Sir _Simon Burley_,
Sir _Richard Burley_, Sir _Bryan Stapleton_, and Sir _Soldan de la
Trane_. These that follow are Marshalled in an exact Series of their
Elections.


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Henry _V._

111. _Sir_ John Dabrichcourt, _Kt._

  _Ermine three barrs humet Gules._

112. Richard Vere, _Earl of_ Oxford.

  _Quarterly Gules and Or, in the first Quarter a Mullet Argent._

113. Thomas Camois, _Lord_ Camois.

  _Or on a chief Gules, three Plates._

114. _Sir_ Simon Felbryge, _Kt._

  _Or a Lyon rampant, rather saliant Gules._

115. _Sir_ William Harington, _Kt._

  _Sable, a fret Argent, a Label of three Points, Gules._

116. John Holland, _Earl of_ Huntingdon.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 63.

117. Sigisimund, _Emperor of_ Germany.

  _Or an Eagle double headed displaid Sable, on the Breast, Hungary and
    Bohemia, in pretence Brandenburgh._

118. Dux Hollandiæ _Lib. Nig. Fol._ 27.

119. .... _Duke of_ Briga.

  _Or an Eagle displaid Sable, escharfoned cross the breast Argent._

120. _Sir_ John Blount, _Kt._

  _Quarterly Sanchet of Spain_, his Mother’s Arms, _viz. Argent a
    Castle Azure and Blont, viz. barry nebulee of six Or and Sable._

121. _Sir_ John Robessart, _Kt._

  _Vert a Lyon rampant Or, vulned on the Shoulders proper._

122. _Sir_ William Phelip, _afterwards Lord_ Bardolph.

  _Quarterly Gules and Argent, in the first Quarter an Eagle displaid
    Or_, _Guillim_ gives him the Lord _Bardolph_’s Arms, whose Heir he
    Married, _Azure three Cinquefoils Or_.

123. John, _King of_ Portugal.

  _Over Or, debrasing a Cross d’Avis Or, of Calatrava, Portugal, viz.
    Argent five Escochions in cross, each charged with five Plates
    saltirewise, a bordure of Castile, viz. Gules, therein Castles Or._

124. Eric, _King of_ Denmark.

  _Or semi de Coeur or Hearts proper, three Lyons passant gardant in
    pale Azure, crowned Or._

125. Richard Beauchamp, _Earl of_ Warwick, _after Lieutenant General,
  and Governor in_ France _and_ Normandy.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 35.

126. Thomas Montacute, _Earl of_ Salisbury.

  _Argent three losenges in fess Gules._

127. Robert Willoughby, _Lord_ Willoughby.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 70. _viz. Ufford and Beke_.

128. Henry Fitz Hugh, _Lord_ Fitz Hugh.

  _Azure three Chevrons fretted in base, and a cheif Or._

129. _Sir_ John Grey, _Kt._ _Earl of_ Tankervile.

  _Gules a Lyon rampant and border, ingrailed Argent._

130. Hugh Stafford, _Lord_ Bourchier.

  _Quarterly Or, a Chevron Gules, a mullet diff. for Stafford and
    Argent, a Cross ingrailed Gules between four water budgets Sable
    for Bourchier._

131. John Moubray, _Earl_ Marshal.

  _Comme son Pere_, _Plantagenet_, _Brotherton_, No. 64. _making only
    the label to consist of three Points_.

132. William de la Pole, _Earl of_ Suffolk, _after Marquiss and Duke
  of_ Suffolk.

  _As his Grandfather_, No. 66.

133. John Clifford, _Lord_ Clifford.

  _Checquy Or and Azure, a fess Gules._

134. _Sir_ Lewis Robessart, _Kt._ _afterwards Lord_ Bourchier.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 12.

135. _The_ Heer, _or Sir_ Henry Van Clux, _a_ German _Lord_, _Captain
  of_ Crewly _in_ Normandy, 7 _Hen._ V.

  _Quarterly per fess embatteled Gules and Argent, in the second and
    third a branch of a Tree in bend, with four folages bend, couped at
    both ends, sable rather Vert._

136. _Sir_ Walter Hungerford, _after Lord_ Hungerford, _and Lord_
  Treasurer _of_ England.

  _Sable two bars Argent in chief, three Plates._

137. Philip le Bon, _Duke of_ Burgundy.

  _France a bordure Gobone, Argent and Gules being Burgundy Modern,
    aliter Quarterly, the first Austria, viz. Gules a fess Argent; the
    second Burgundy, Modemas aforesaid; the third, Bendy Or and Azure
    Burgundy ancient; the fourth, Brabant Sable, a Lyon rampant Or,
    over all Flanders, Or a Lyon rampant Sable._


            _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Henry VI.

138. John Talbot, _Lord_ Talbot, _after Earl of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 100.

139. Thomas Scales, _Lord_ Scales.

  _Gules six escallops, three hundred and twenty one Argent._

140. _Sir_ John Falstoff, _Kt._

  _Quarterly Or and Azure, on a bend Gules, three escallops Argent._

141. Peter, _Duke of_ Conimbero, _third Son of_ John _I. King of_
  Portugal.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 123. _but without the Calatrava Cross of Flower
    Deluces, viz. Portugal a border of Castile_.

142. Humphry Stafford, _Earl of_ Stafford, _after Duke of Bucks_.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 96.

143. _Sir_ John Ratcliff, _Kt._

  _Argent a bend ingrailed Sable._

144. John Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel, _and Lord_ Maltravers.

  _Comme_, No. 106, _and_ 95, _and_ 36.

145. Richard, _Duke of_ York, _the King’s Lieutenant in_ France _and_
  Normandy.

  _Quarterly France modern and England, on a label of three Points
    Argent nine torteauxes._

146. Edward, _King of_ Portugal.

  _Comme_, No. 123.

147. Edmund Beaufort, _Earl of_ Moriton, _after Earl of_ Dorset, _and
  Duke of_ Somerset.

  _Quarterly France modern and England, a border gobone Ermine and
    Azure._

148. _Sir_ John Grey, _Kt._

  _Barry of six Argent and Azure in chief, three torteauxes over all, a
    label of three Points Argent for his difference, being of the
    Ruthyn Line._

149. Richard Nevil, _Earl of_ Salisbury, _after Lord Chancellor of_
  England.

  _Quarterly first and fourth_, his Wives Arms, _Argent three losenges
    enjoyn’d in fess, viz. Montague, Gules quartering Monthermer Or, an
    Eagle displaid Vert, second and third, Gules a Saltire Argent,
    Comme son Pere_, No. 98. _with a label of three Points gobone
    Argent and Azure difference therein_.

150. William Nevil, _Lord_ Falconbergh, _after Earl of_ Kent.

  _Quarterly first and fourth_, his Wives Arms, _Argent a Lyon rampant
    Azure Falconbergh, second and third, Comme son Pere_, No. 98. _viz.
    Gules a saltire Argent, a mullet Sable difference_.

151. Albert, _Duke of_ Austria, _afterwards Emperor_.

  _Or on the breast of an imperial Eagle, i. e. double-headed and
    displaid Sable, an Escochion of Austria, viz. Gules a fess Argent._

152. John Beaufort, _Earl of_ Somerset, _afterwards Duke of_ Somerset,
  _and Earl of_ Kendal.

  _Quarterly France modern and England, a border gobone Argent and
    Azure._

153. Ralph Butler, _Lord_ Sudley, after _Lord Treasurer of_ England.

  _Gules a fess checquy Argent and Sable, between six cross patees
    fitchee of the second._

154. Henry, _Duke of_ Visco, _fourth Son of_ John _I. King of_
  Portugal, _after King of_ Portugal.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 141.

155. John Beaumont, _Viscount_ Beaumont.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 69.

156. Gaston de Foix, _Earl of_ Longueville _and_ Benanges, Captain de
  Buch.

  _Quarterly first and fourth Or, three Pales Gules_, the Arms of the
    old Counts _de Foix, second and third Argent, two Cows passant,
    Gules armed and ingrailed, and collered Or, Bells hanging at their
    Necks, Azure for Bearne, vel vice versa, both the maternal Coat of
    the Gaston_. Over the whole Atchievement, _a label of three Points
    terminating in Crosses Sable, on each of which charged with five
    escallops Argent_, in allusion to the Arms of _Greilly_, the
    original House of this _Gaston_.

157. John de Foix, _Earl_ of Kendal.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 156.

158. John Beauchamp, _Lord_ Beauchamp _of_ Powick, _and after Lord
  Treasurer of_ England.

  _Gules, a fess between six martlets Or._

159. Alphonsus, _King of_ Portugal.

  _Comme_, No. 123.

160. Albro Vasques d’Almada, _Earl of_ Averence _in_ Normandy.

  _Or on a bend Vert between two Eagles, displaid Gules, as many cross
    patonces Argent pierced._

161. Thomas Hoo, _Lord_ Hoo.

  _Quarterly Sable and Argent._

162. _Sir_ Francis Surien, _Kt._

  _Or three pales Gules, on a chief Sable, three escallops Argent._

163. Alphonsus, _King of_ Aragon.

  _Aragon, viz. Or four pales Gules._

164. Casimire _IV._ _King of_ Poland.

  _Quarterly first and fourth_, the Dutchy of _Lithuania, viz. Gules a
    Chevalier armed at all Points a Cap-a-pee, brandishing his Sword
    aloft, Argent garnished Or, Mounted on a barded Courser, furnished
    throughout of the second, and holding a Shield in his left Hand,
    Azure charged with a Cross double crossed as the second; second and
    third Gules, an Eagle displaid Argent, rather vice versa_, the last
    being _Poland_.

165. William, _Duke of_ Brunswick.

  _Gules two Lyons passant gardant in pale Or._

166. Richard Widvile, _Lord_ Rivers, _afterwards created Earl_ Rivers.

  _Argent a fess and canton Gules._ Philipot Vil. Cant. says he bore
    Rivers _in pretence_. _Gules a Gryphon rampant Or._

167. John Mowbray, _Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 131.

168. Henry Bourchier, _Viscount_ Bourchier, _after Lord Treasurer of_
  England, _and Earl of_ Essex.

  _Bourchier Comme_, No. 83. _quartering Lovain, viz. Gules a fess
    between fifteen billets Or_.

169. _Sir_ Philip Wentworth, _Kt._

  _Sable a Chevron between three leopards faces Or._

170. _Sir_ Edward Hall, _Kt._

  _Argent three cross Croslets fitchee Azure in bend, between two
    cotises Gules._

171. Frederick _III. Emperor of_ Germany.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 151.

172. John Talbot, _Earl of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 138.

173. Lionell Wells, _Lord_ Wells.

  _Or a Lyon rampant quevee fourchee Sable._

174. Thomas Stanley, _Lord_ Stanley.

  _Quarterly first and fourth Or on a chief indented Azure_, three
    Plates for _Latham_, his great Grandmother’s Arms; _second and
    third Stanley, viz. Argent on a bend Azure, three Staggs heads
    caboshed Or_.

175. Edward, _Prince of_ Wales.

  The national Arms, _viz. Quarterly France modern and England, a label
    of three Points Argent_.

176. Jasper, _Earl of_ Pembroke, after _Duke of_ Bedford.

  _Quarterly France modern and England, a border Azure, semi de Flower
    de Luce Or._

177. James Butler, _Earl of_ Wiltshire.

  _Or a chief indented Azure._

178. John Sutton, _Lord_ Dudley.

  _Or a Lyon rampant quevee fourchee Vert._

179. John Bourchier, _Lord_ Berners.

  _Argent a Cross ingrailed Gules between four Water-budgets Sable, on
    a label of three Points, of the second nine Lyons of England._

180. Richard Nevil, _Earl of_ Warwick.

  _Quarterly of four; first_, his Wives Arms, _Beauchamp_, Earl of
    _Warwick_, _viz. Gules a fess between six Croslets Or impaling_ the
    old Earls of _Warwick_ _checquy. Or and Azure a Chevron Ermine;
    second_, his Mother’s Arms, _viz. Montague, Argent three losenges
    in fess impaling Monthermer, Or an Eagle displaid Vert; third,
    Spenser, viz. quarterly Argent and Gules a bend Sable, in the
    second and third a fret Or; fourth, Clare, impaling Or, three
    Chevrons Gules impaling Nevil_, his paternal Coat, _viz. Gules a
    saltire Argent, differenced with a label gobonated Argent and
    Azure_.

181. William Bonvill, _Lord_ Bonvill.

  _Sable six mullets, 3 2 1 Argent pierced Gules._

182. John Wenlock, _Lord_ Wenlock.

  _Argent a Chevron Sable between three Negroes heads brased proper._

183. _Sir_ Thomas Kyriell, _Kt._

  _Or two Chevrons Gules on a Canton, of the last a Lyon of England._


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Edward IV.

184. George, _Duke of_ Clarence.

  _Quarterly France and England, a label of three Points Argent, on
    each a canton Gules._

185. _Sir_ William Chamberlayn, _Kt._

  _Gules a Chevron between three escallops, Or a label extended of
    three Points Argent._

186. John Tiptoft, _Earl of_ Worcester, _after High Constable of_
  England.

  _Argent a saltire ingrailed Gules._

187. John Nevil, _Lord_ Montague, _after Earl of_ Northumberland, _and
  Marquiss of_ Montague.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 149. _a crescent difference in pretence
    quarterly; first, Argent on a Canton Gules a rose Or for Bradeston,
    two Gules a Cross ingrailed Argent, for Ingolsthorp_, [Wife of this
    Lord _Montague_] _third, Delapole, viz. Azure a fess between three
    leopards faces Or; fourthly and lastly, Brough Argent on a fess
    dancet Sable three besants_.

188. William Herbert, _Lord_ Herbert, _after Earl of_ Pembroke.

  _Parti per pale, Azure and Gules three lyons rampant Argent._

189. William Hastings, _Lord_ Hastings.

  _Argent a Maunch Sable._

190. John Scrope, _Lord_ Scrope _of_ Bolton.

  _Azure a bend Or._

191. _Sir_ John Astley, _Kt._

  _Quarterly Azure a cinquefoil Ermine for Astley, and Or two barrs
    Gules for Harcourt, over both a label extended of three Points
    Ermine._

192. Ferdinand, _King of_ Naples, _Son of_ Alphonsus, _King of Aragon_.

  _Aragon, viz. Or four pales Gules, a baston sinister Argent._

193. Francis Sfortia, _Duke of_ Milan.

  _Milan, viz. a Guivre or Snake wreathed and erected in pale Azure
    vorant, an Infant issuant proper._

194. James, _Earl of_ Douglas.

  _Argent an heart Gules regally crowned proper as the augmentation, on
    a chief Azure, three mullets Argent._

195. Galiard de Duras, _Lord of_ Duras.

  _Quarterly, Gules a lyon rampant Argent, and Argent a bend Azure_,
    both by the Name of _Duras_.

196. _Sir_ Robert Harcourt, _Kt._

  _Gules two barrs Or._

197. Anthony Widvile, _Lord_ Scales _and_ Nucells, _afterwards Earl_
  Rivers.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 166. there should be the due difference of a
    _label_.

198. Richard, _Duke of_ Gloucester, after _King of_ England, _of that
  Name the third_.

  _Quarterly France and England, a label of three Points Ermine._

199. ...... _Lord_ Mountgryson _in_ Apulia.

  ..........

200. John Moubray, _Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 167. _viz._ Plantagenet Brotherton.

201. John de la Pole, _Duke of_ Suffolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 132.

202. William Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 144.

203. John Stafford, _Earl of_ Wiltshire.

  His Grandmothers Arms _Plantagenet Woodstock, viz. Quarterly, France
    modern and England, a border Argent and Crescent difference; aliter
    Quarterly, first, Plantagenet Woodstock, ut ante; second, Azure a
    bend Argent cotised between six lyons rampant Or, for Bohun_, Earl
    of _Hereford; third_, the said last Coat _with three mullets Gules
    on the bend_ for _Bohun_, Earl of _Northampton; fourth_, his own
    paternal Arms, _viz. Or a Chevron Gules_, in the Centre of the
    whole, _a Crescent difference_.

204. John Howard, _Lord_ Howard, _after Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Quarterly first and fourth, Plantagenet Brotherton pro Mowbray, viz.
    England a label of three Points Argent; second and third, Howard,
    Gules a bend between six cross Croslets fitchee Argent._

205. Walter Devereux, _Lord_ Ferrers _of_ Chartley.

  _Argent a fess Gules in chief three torteauxes._

206. Walter Blount, _Lord_ Montjoy.

  _Quarterly; first Argent two Wolves passant in pale Sable, a border
    Gules of Saltires Argent for ayela; second, Azure a Castle Or,
    sanchet de ayela_, his Grandmother’s Arms, a _Spanish_ Lady;
    _third, barry nebulee of six Or and Sable_, his own paternal Arms;
    _and fourth, Vair and Beauchamp_ of _Hatch_, a maternal Ancestor.

207. Charles, _Duke of_ Burgundy.

  _Burgundy modern, viz. France a border gobonated Argent and Gules._

208. Henry Stafford, _Duke of_ Buckingham.

  _Plantagenet Woodstock_, his great Grandmother’s Arms, _viz.
    Quarterly France modern and England a border Argent_, his own Coat
    was, _Or a Chevron Gules._

209. Thomas Fitz Alan, _Lord_ Maltravers, _afterwards Earl of_ Arundel.

  _Quarterly Fitz Alan, Comme son Pere_, No. 202. _and Maltravers, viz.
    Sable a fret Or over the whole Atchievement, a label extended of
    three Points Argent for difference._

210. _Sir_ William Parr, _Knight of_ Kendal.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, Ross of Kendal, viz. Or three
    Water-budgets Sable; second and third, Argent two barrs Azure, a
    border ingrailed Sable Parr._

211. Frederick, _Duke of_ Urbin.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, Or an Eagle displaid Sable; second and
    third, Or bends couped Azure, between the two uppermost an Eagle
    displaid Sable, the said Quarterings separated by a Pale Gules,
    charged with the Papal Infula or tripple Crowned Mytre Or in chief,
    and the Ecclesiastical Keys, in Saltire the dexter Gold, the
    Sinister Argent in base tyed Azure_, for his Office of Gonfalonier
    under the Pope, tho’ properly this Mytre is a Gonfannon
    pavilionated.

212. Henry Percy, _Earl of_ Northumberland.

  _Quarterly Percy, Lovain and Lucy, viz. Or a lyon rampant Azure and
    Gules, three lucies hauriant Argent._

213. Edward, _Prince of_ Wales.

  _Quarterly France and England, a label of three Points Silver._

214. Richard, _Duke of_ York, _second Son to King_ Edward.

  _Quarterly France and England, a label of three Points Argent, on the
    first one Canton Gules._

215. Thomas Grey, _Marquiss of_ Dorset, _and Earl of_ Huntingdon.

  _Barry of six Argent and Azure, in chief three torteauxes, a label
    extended of three Points Ermine._

216. _Sir_ Thomas Montgomery, _Kt._

  _Gules a Chevron Ermine between three Flower Deluces Or._

217. Ferdinand, _King of_ Castile _and_ Leon.

  _Quarterly Castile and Leon, viz. Gules a Castle Or and Argent, and
    lyon rampant Gules crowned Or._

218. Hercules d’Esti, _Duke of_ Ferrara.

  _Quarterly; first, Or an Eagle displaid Sable, bequd. membred and
    couroned Gules, the Empire; second, for France a bordure parte per
    indenture throughout Gules and Or; for Ferrara, the said
    Quarterings separated by a Pale Gules, charged with the papal Keys
    in Saltire, the dexter being Or, the sinister Argent as
    Gonfalonier, over all pretence Azure an Eagle displaid Argent for
    Esti._ Mr. _Ashmole_ afterwards corrected it as now in his Library.
    _Palewise of three pieces, first, partie per fess in the chief Or
    an Eagle displaid Sable, membred langued and Crown’d Gules, and in
    base Azure three Flower Deluces within a bordure indented Or and
    Gules; secondly, Gules, two Gules in Saltire, the one Or, the other
    Argent, charged in fess with an Escutcheon of pretence Azure
    supporting an Eagle; of the third membred langued and Crown’d, of
    the second, over all in chief a papal Crown Or, garnished with
    sundry Gemms Azure and Parts; thirdly, the third as the first,
    counter plac’d._

219. John, _King of_ Portugal, _Son to_ Alphonsus _V._

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 159.


          _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Richard III.

220. _Sir_ John Conyers, _Kt._

  _Azure a manch Or._

221. Thomas Howard, _Earl of_ Surrey, _after Lord Treasurer of_
  England, _and Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Quarterly, first and fourth Gules a bend betwixt six cross Croslets
    fitchee Argent for Howard; second and third, England a label of
    three Points Argent, for Plantagenet, Brotherton and Mowbray; over
    the whole a label extended of three Points Argent._

222. Francis Lovell, _Viscount_ Lovell.

  _Comme_, No: 102.

223. _Sir_ Richard Ratclift, _Kt._

  _Argent a bend ingrailed Sable._

224. _Sir_ Thomas Burgh, _Kt. after Lord_ Burgh.

  _Azure three Flower Deluces Ermine._

225. Thomas Stanley, _Lord_ Stanley, _after Earl of_ Darby.

  _Argent on a bend Azure, three Stags Heads caboshed Or, a crescent
    diff._

226. Sir Richard Tunstall, _Kt._

  _Sable three combs Argent._


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Henry VII.

227. John Vere, _Earl of_ Oxford.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 112.

228. _Sir_ Giles d’Aubeny, _after Lord_ d’Aubeny.

  _Gules four fusils in fess Argent._

229. Thomas Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel.

  _This is the same Person_, No. 209. _called_ Thomas _Lord_
    Maltravers, _who succeeded his Father_ William Fitz Alan, _Earl of_
    Arundel; _therefore one of them should be out, for other Catalogues
    have him not temp._ Hen. VII.

230. George Talbot, _Earl of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 171.

231. John Wells, _Viscount_ Wells.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 173.

232. George Stanley, _Lord_ Strange.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 225. _in pretence_ his Wives Arms, _viz.
    Strange of knockin, Gules two lyons passant in Pale Argent
    quartering Mohun, Or a Cross ingrailed Sable_.

233. _Sir_ Edward Wydevile, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Comme_, No. 197. _with due difference_.

234. John Dynham, _Lord_ Dynham, _Lord Treasurer of_ England.

  _Gules four fusils in fess Ermine._

235. Maximilian, _King of the_ Romans, _after Emperor of_ Germany.

  _Or on the breast of a single headed Eagle displaid Sable, an
    Escochion Quarterly of four first, Barry of eight Argent and Gules
    for Hungary; second, Gules a fess Argent for Austria; third, Gules
    a lyon rampant with two Tails, armed langued and crowned Or for
    Bohemia; fourth, bendy Or and Azure, a bordure Gules for Burgundy
    ancient._

236. _Sir_ John Savage, _Kt._

  _Quarterly, first and fourth, Argent a pale of Losenges Sable, Daniel
    pro Savage; second, Or on a fess Azure, three garbs of the first
    Vernon; third and last, Gules a Chevron between three martlets
    Argent_, the ancient Arms of _Savage_, over the whole Atchievement
    _a label extended of three Points Gules_.

237. _Sir_ William Stanley, _Kt._ _Lord_ Chamberlain.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 225. _a crescent on a Crescent difference_.

238. _Sir_ John Cheney, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Azure six Lyons rampant Argent and Canton Ermine, Shirland_’s Arms
    his maternal Ancestor.

239. Alphonsus, _Duke of_ Calabria _and_ Naples, _King of_ Sicily _and_
  Jerusalem.

  _Quarterly, the first Arragon, viz. Or four pales Gules, the second
    Calabria_, viz. _Argent a Cross potent Sable._

240. Arthur, _Prince of_ Wales.

  _Quarterly France and England a label Argent._

241. Thomas Grey, _Marquiss of_ Dorset.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 215.

242. Henry Percy, _Earl of_ Northumberland.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 212.

243. Henry Bourchier, _Earl of_ Essex.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 168, _vel_ 83.

244. _Sir_ Charles Somerset, _Knight Banneret, after Earl of_
  Worcester, _and Lord_ Herbert.

  _Quarterly France modern and England, a border Gobone Argent and
    Azure, over all a baston sinister Argent impaling_ his Wife
    _Herbert, viz. per pale Azure and Gules three Lyons rampant Argent_.

245. Robert Willoughby, _Lord_ Brook.

  _Quarterly Ufford and Beke, viz. Sable a Cross ingrailed Or, and
    Gules a cross moline Argent_, his maternal Ancestors; but the
    proper Arms of his Family, _Or fretty Azure_.

246. _Sir_ Edward Poynings, _Kt._

  _Barry of six Or and Vert, a bend Gules._

247. _Sir_ Gilbert Talbot, _Knight Banneret of_ Grafton.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 172. _a Crescent difference_.

248. _Sir_ Richard Poole.

  _Parti per pale Or and Sable, a Saltire ingrailed counter-changed._

249. Edward Stafford, _Duke of_ Buckingham.

  _Quarterly of four, first, Comme son Pere_, No. 208. i. e.
    _Plantagenet Woodstock; second, Azure a bend Argent cotised between
    six Lyons rampant Or, Bohun_ Earl of _Hereford; third, Or a Chevron
    Gules Stafford; fourth, Azure on a bend Argent cotised between six
    Lyons rampant Or, three mullets Gules, Bohun_ Earl of _Northampton_.

250. Henry, _Duke of_ York, _after King of_ England, _of that Name the
  eighth_.

  _Quarterly France and England, a label of three Points Ermine._

251. Edward Courtney, _Earl of_ Devonshire.

  _Or three Torteauxes._

252. _Sir_ Richard Guilford, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Or a Saltire between four martlets Sable._

253. Edmund de la Pole, _Earl of_ Suffolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 201.

254. _Sir_ Thomas Lovell, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Argent on a Chevron Azure between three Squirrels, sercint Gules, an
    annulet difference._

255. _Sir_ Reginald Bray, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Argent a Chevron between three Eagles Legs, erased a la quise Sable._

256. John, _King of_ Denmark.

  _Denmark Comme_, No. 124.

257. Guido Ubaldo, _Duke of_ Urbin.

  _Comme_, No. 211.

258. Gerald Fitz Gerald, _Earl of_ Kildare.

  _Argent a Saltire Gules._

259. Henry Stafford, _Lord_ Stafford, _after Earl of_ Wiltshire.

  _Plantagenet Woodstock, a crescent difference, Comme son Frere_, No.
    249.

260. Richard Grey, _Earl of_ Kent.

  _Barry of six Argent and Azure, in chief three Torteauxes._

261. _Sir_ Rys ap Thomas, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Argent a Chevron Sable between three cornish Choughs proper._

262. Philip, _King of_ Castile.

  _Quarterly Castile and Leon, Comme_, No. 217.

263. _Sir_ Thomas Brandon, _Knight Banneret_.

  _Barry of ten Argent and Gules, over all a Lyon rampant Or Crowned
    per pale; of the second and last, a mullet difference._

264. Charles, _Archduke of_ Austria, _Prince of_ Spain, _after Emperor
  of_ Germany.

  _Quarterly Castile and Leon, Comme_, No. 217.


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Henry VIII.

265. Thomas Darcy, _Lord_ Darcy.

  _Azure semi of cross Croslets, three cinquefoiles Argent._

266. Edward Sutton, _Lord_ Dudley.

  _Comme_, No. 178.

267. Emanuel, _King of_ Portugal.

  _Comme_, No. 218. _viz. Portugal debrusing a Calatrava Cross, or a
    Cross Flower Deluced, within a bordure of Castile_.

268. Thomas Howard, _Lord_ Howard, _eldest Son to_ Thomas, _Duke of_
  Norfolk, _afterwards Earl of_ Surry, _and second Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Gules a bend between six cross Croslets fitchee Argent, a label of
    three Points Or._

269. Thomas West, _Lord_ La Ware.

  _Argent a fess dancet Sable._

270. _Sir_ Henry Marney, _Kt._ _after Lord_ Marney.

  _Gules a Lyon rampant gardant Argent._

271. George Nevil, _Lord_ Abergaveny.

  _Gules on a Saltire Argent, a Rose of Lancaster_, i. e. _Gules_.

272. _Sir_ Edward Howard, _Kt. second Son to_ Thomas, _Duke of_
  Norfolk, _second Duke of that Family_.

  _Gules a bend between six cross Croslets fitchee Argent, a crescent
    difference Sable._

273. _Sir_ Charles Brandon, _after Duke of_ Suffolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 264. _but without difference_.

274. Julian de Medices, _Brother to Pope_ Leo X.

  _Or eight roundels in Orle, that in chief of France, viz. Azure
    charged with three Flower Deluces Gold, the other Gules._

275. Edward Stanley, _Lord_ Monteagle, _second Son to the Earl of_
  Derby.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 225. _in pretence Gules a Lyon rampant Or_, for
    his Wife _Vaughan_.

276. Thomas Dacres, _Lord_ Dacres _of_ Gilessland.

  _Gules three escallops Argent._

277. _Sir_ William Sandys, _after Lord_ Sandys.

  _Argent a Cross ragulee Sable in pretence Bray_, his Wives Arms,
    _viz. Quarterly first and fourth, Gules three Bars Vair Longville
    pro Bray; second and third, Argent a Chevron between three Eagles
    Legs._

278. Henry Courtney, _Earl of_ Devonshire.

  _Quarterly first and fourth_, an Augmentation, _viz. France and
    England within a Border of England and France Quarterly; second,
    Courtney, Comme son Pere_, No. 251. _third, Rivers_, Earl of
    _Devonshire, Or a Lyon rampant Azure_.

279. Ferdinand, _Prince and Infant of_ Spain, _Archduke of_ Austria,
  _after Emperor of_ Germany.

  _Quarterly Castile and Leon, ut_ No. 216. _a label of three Points
    Azure, on the Foot of the first a Crescent Or._

280. _Sir_ Richard Wingfield, _Kt._

  _Argent on a bend Gules cottised Sable, three pair of Wings impailed,
    of the first an Estoile of sixteen Rays._

281. _Sir_ Thomas Bullen, _Kt. after Viscount_ Rochford, _and Earl of_
  Wiltshire _and_ Ormond.

  _Argent a Chevron Gules between three Bulls-Heads coupee Sable_,
    afterwards his Mother’s Arms, _Butler_ of _Ormond, Or a chief
    indented Azure_.

282. Walter d’Evereux, _Lord_ Ferrars _of_ Chartley, _after Viscount_
  Hereford.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 205.

283. Arthur Plantaginet, _Viscount_ Lisle.

  _Quarterly first, France and England; second and third, Ulster, viz.
    Or a Cross Gules; fourth, Mortimer_, Earl of _March; viz, Barry of
    six Or and Azure, on a chief of the second a pale two Esquens based
    dexter and sinister Gold, an Escochion Argent, over all a baton
    sinister Azure_.

284. Robert Radcliff, _Viscount_ Fitz Walter, _after Earl of_ Sussex.

  _Quarterly first and fourth, Argent a bend ingrailed Sable, Radcliff,
    second and third, Or a fess between two Chevrons Gules Fitz Walter._

285. William Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 209. but without difference.

286. Thomas Mannors, _Lord_ Roos, _after Earl of_ Rutland.

  _Or two Barrs Azure a chief Quarterly, two Flower Deluces of France,
    and a Lyon of England._

287. Henry Fitz Roy, _after Earl of_ Nottingham, _and Duke of_ Richmond
  _and_ Somerset.

  _Quarterly France and England, a border Quarterly Ermine and compone
    Argent and Azure a baton sinister of the second._

288. Ralph Nevil, _Earl of_ Westmorland.

  _Comme_, No. 98.

289. William Blount. _Lord_ Montjoy.

  _Barry nebulee of six Or and Sable._

290. _Sir_ William Fitz Williams, _Kt. after Earl of_ Southampton.

  _Losengy Or and Gules a mullet difference._

291. _Sir_ Henry Guilford, _Kt._

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 252. _with a Canton of Granada, viz. Argent a
    Pomegranet slipped and leaved all proper_.

292. Francis I. _the_ French _King_.

  _France, viz. Azure three Flower Deluces Or._

293. John Vere, _Earl of_ Oxford.

  _Comme son Cousin_, No. 227.

294. Henry Percy, _Earl of_ Northumberland.

  _Quarterly; first, Percy, Lovain, Or a Lyon rampant Azure; second,
    Quarterly France modern and England a border gobonne; third, Lucy
    Gules three Lucies hauriant Argent; fourth, Poynings, Barry of six
    Or and Vert a bend Gules._

295. Anthony Montmorency, _Duke of_ Montmorency.

  _Or a Cross Gules between sixteen Eagles displaid Azure._

296. Philip Chabor, _Earl of_ Newblanch.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, Or three Chabots Chubs or Chevin Fish
    hauriant Argent; second, Argent a Lyon rampant Gules, Crowned Or;
    third, Gules a Sun Argent._

297. James V. _King of_ Scotland.

  _Scotland, viz. Or a Lyon rampant within a double tressure flory
    counter flory Gules._

298. _Sir_ Nicholas Carew, _Kt._

  _Or three Lyons passant in pale Sable, with due difrence._

299. Henry Clifford, _Earl of_ Cumberland.

  _Comme_, No. 133.

300. Thomas Cromwell, _Lord_ Cromwell, _after Earl of_ Essex.

  _Azure on a fess between three Lyons rampant Or a rose Gules, on
    either side whereof a Chough proper._

301. John Russell, _Lord_ Russell, _after Earl of_ Bedford.

  _Argent a Lyon rampant Gules on a chief Sable, three escallops of the
    first._

302. _Sir_ Thomas Cheyney, _Kt._

  _Comme son Oncle_, No. 237.

303. _Sir_ William Kingston, _Kt._

  _Azure a fess between three Leopards faces Or._

304. Thomas Audley, _Lord_ Audley _of_ Walden, _and Lord Chancellor of_
  England.

  _Quarterly per pale indented Or and Azure, in the second and third,
    an Eagle displaid of the first, on a bend of the second a fret
    between two martlets Gold._

305. _Sir_ Anthony Browne, _Kt._

  _Sable three Lyons passant in bend double cotised, Argent a Crescent
    difference._

306. Edward Seymour, _Earl of_ Hertford, _after Duke of_ Somerset.

  _Quarterly_ the Augmentation, _viz. Or on a Pile Gules between six
    Flower Deluces Azure, the Lyons of England; second, Seymour, viz.
    Gules a pair of Wings conjoyned in pale tips downward Or._

307. Henry Howard, _Earl of_ Surrey.

  _Gules on the middle of a bend between six cross Croslets Argent_,
    the Augmentation, _viz. an Escochion Or, therein a demi Lyon within
    a double Scotch tressure Gules, an Arrow transfixing his Mouth, of
    the last a label of three Points Azure._

308. _Sir_ John Gage, _Kt._

  _Quarterly per bend dexter and sinister Azure and Argent, a Saltire
    Gules._

309. _Sir_ Anthony Wingfield, _Kt._

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 281. but without the _Estoil_.

310. John Sutton, (alias Dudley) _Viscount_ Lisle, _after Earl of_
  Warwick, _and Duke of_ Northumberland.

  _Or two Lyons passant in pale Azure, Somery_ his maternal Ancestor.

311. William Paulet, _Lord_ St. John _of_ Basing, _after Earl of_
  Wiltshire, _and Marquiss of_ Winchester.

  _Sable three Swords in pile Points conjoyned in base Argent Hilts Or,
    a Crescent difference._

312. William Parr, _Lord_ Parr _of_ Kendall, _after Earl of_ Essex,
  _and Marquiss of_ Northampton.

  _Argent two Bars Azure a border ingrailed Sable, vide son Beau Pere_,
    No. 210.

313. _Sir_ John Wallop, _Kt._

  _Argent a bend unde Sable._

314. Henry Fitz Alan, _Earl of_ Arundel.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 285.

315. _Sir_ Anthony St. Leger, _Kt._

  _Azure frette Argent a chief Or._

316. Francis Talbot, _Earl of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 172.

317. Thomas Wriothesley, _Lord_ Wriothesley, _after Earl of_
  Southampton.

  _Azure a Cross Or between four Falcons Argent._


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Edward VI.

318. Henry Grey, _Marquiss of_ Dorset, _after Duke of_ Suffolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 241.

319. Edward Stanley, _Earl of_ Derby.

  _Comme_, No. 225.

320. Thomas Seymour, _Lord_ Seymour _of_ Sudley.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 307. _with a Crescent or Mullet difference_.

321. _Sir_ William Paget, _Kt. after Lord_ Paget.

  _Sable on a Cross ingrailed between four Eagles displaid Argent, five
    Lyons passant of the first._

322. Francis Hastings, _Earl of_ Huntingdon.

  _Comme_, No. 189.

323. George Brook, _Lord_ Cobham.

  _Gules on a Chevron Argent, a Lyon rampant Sable Crowned Or._

324. Thomas West, _Lord_ La Ware.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 269.

325. _Sir_ William Herbert, _Kt. after Lord_ Herbert _of_ Cardiff, _and
  Earl of_ Pembroke.

  _Perti per pale Azure and Gules, three Lyons rampant Argent, a border
    Gobonee Or, and of the second besanted._

326. Henry II. _the_ French _King_.

  _France Comme_, No. 292.

327. Edward Clinton, alias Fines, _Lord_ Clinton, _after Earl of_
  Lincoln.

  _Argent six cross Croslets fitchee Sable on a chief Azure, two
    mullets Or pierced Gules._

328. Thomas Darcy, _Lord_ Darcy _of_ Chiche.

  _Argent three cinquefoiles Gules._

329. Henry Nevil, _Earl of_ Westmorland.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 288.

330. _Sir_ Andrew Dudley, _Kt._

  _Or a Lyon rampant quevee fourchee Vert a Crescent difference._


             _Knights elected in the Reign of Queen_ Mary.

331. Philip, _Prince of_ Spain, _after King of_ England, _by that Name
  the second_.

  _Quarterly Castile and Leon, Comme_, No. 262.

332. Henry Ratcliff, _Earl of_ Sussex.

  _Argent a bend ingrailed Sable._

333. Emanuel Philibert, _Duke of_ Savoy.

  _Tierce emanche towards the chief the dexter Westphalia or ancient
    Saxony, viz. Gules on Horse enraged Argent the same counterturned;
    the sinister Saxony modern, viz. barry of eight Or and Sable, over
    all a chaplet of rue Vert in bend, ente in base Angria, viz. Argent
    three bouteroles Gules._

334. William Howard, _Lord_ Howard _of_ Effingham.

  _Gules on a bend between six cross Croslets Argent_, the _Scotch_
    Augmentation, _Comme_, No. 307. _a mullet difference_.

335. Anthony Browne, _Viscount_ Montagu.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 305.

336. _Sir_ Edward Hastings, _Kt. after Lord_ Hastings _of_ Loughborough.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 322, _a crescent difference_.

337. Thomas Ratcliff, _Earl of_ Sussex.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 332.

338. William Grey, _Lord_ Grey _of_ Wilton.

  _Barry of six Argent and Azure, a label of five Points Gules._

339. _Sir_ Robert Rochester.

  _Checquy Argent and Gules on a fess Azure, three escallops Or._


           _Knights elected in the Reign of Queen_ Elizabeth.

340. Thomas Howard, _Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 308. but without the _label_, _viz. Howard_
    with the _Scotch_ Augmentation in the middle of the _bend_.

341. Henry Manners, _Earl of_ Rutland.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 286.

342. _Sir_ Robert Dudley, _Kt. after Earl of_ Leicester.

  _Comme son Oncle_, No. 330.

343. Adolphus, _Duke of_ Holstein.

  _Norway, viz. Gules a Lyon rampant Argent crowned Or, holding, or
    supporting with three of his Feet, a danish Battle Ax, of the last
    headed as the second._

344. George Talbot, _Earl of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 316.

345. Henry Carey, _Lord_ Hunsdon.

  _Argent, on a bend Sable three Roses of the Field, a crescent on a
    crescent difference._

346. Thomas Percy, _Earl of_ Northumberland.

  _Comme_, No. 212. _viz. Percy, Lovain, and Lucy, Quarterly_.

347. Ambrose Dudley, _Earl of_ Warwick.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 342. without the _crescent_ distinction.

348. Charles IX. _the_ French _King_.

  _France, Comme_, No. 326.

349. Francis Russel, _Earl of_ Bedford.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 301.

350. _Sir_ Henry Sidney, _Kt._

  _Or a Pheon Azure._

351. Maximilian II. _Emperor of_ Germany.

  _Or, on the Breast of an imperial Eagle_, i. e. _double headed and
    displaid Sable, an Escochion of Hungary and Bohemia, viz. barry of
    eight Argent and Gules impailing Gules, a Lyon rampant Argent
    crowned Or_.

352. Henry Hastings, _Earl of_ Huntingdon.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 322.

353. William Somerset, _Earl of_ Worcester.

  _Or, on a fess France and England, Quarterly and borded gobenee
    Argent and Azure._

354. Francis Montmorency, _Duke of_ Montmorency.

  _Comme_, No. 295.

355. Walter d’Evereux, _Viscount_ Hereford, _after Earl of_ Essex.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 282.

356. William Cecill, _Lord_ Burghley, _after Lord Treasurer of_ England.

  _Barry of ten Argent and Azure on six Escocheons Sable, as many Lyons
    rampant of the first._

357. Arthur Grey, _Lord_ Grey _of_ Wilton.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 338.

358. Edmund Bruges, _Lord_ Chandos.

  _Argent on a Cross Sable, a Leopard’s Face Or._

359. Henry Stanley, _Earl of_ Derby.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 319.

360. Henry Herbert, _Earl of_ Pembroke.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 325. _omitting the besants_.

361. Henry III. _the_ French _King_.

  _France Comme_, No. 348.

362. Charles Howard, _Lord_ Howard _of_ Effingham, _after Earl of_
  Nottingham.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 334. _viz. Howard_, with a _mullet difference_.

363. Rodolph, _Emperor of_ Germany.

  _Comme_, No. 351.

364. Frederick II. _King of_ Denmark.

  _Denmark, Comme_, No. 257. but the _Lyons_ crowned _Or_.

365. John Casimire, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, the Palatinate, viz. Sable a Lyon
    rampant Or, crowned Gules; second and third, losongy bend-wise,
    Argent and Azure for Bavaria._

366. Edward Manners, _Earl of_ Rutland.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 341.

367. William Brook, _Lord_ Cobham.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 323.

368. Henry Scrope, _Lord_ Scrope _of_ Bolton.

  _Comme_, No. 190.

369. Robert d’Evereux, _Earl of_ Essex.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 355.

370. Thomas Butler, _Earl of_ Ormond _and_ Ossery.

  _Or a chief indented Azure._

371. _Sir_ Christopher Hatton, _Kt. after Lord Chancellor of_ England.

  _Azure a Chevron between three garbs Or._

372. Henry Ratcliff, _Earl of_ Sussex.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 337.

373. Thomas Sackville, _Lord_ Buckhurst, _after Lord Treasurer of_
  England, _and Earl of_ Dorset.

  _Quarterly; Or and Gules a bend vaire._

374. Henry IV. _the_ French _King_.

  _France, Comme_, No. 361.

375. James VI. _King of_ Scotland, _after King of_ England, France,
  _and_ Ireland.

  _Scotland, Comme_, No. 297.

376. Gilbert Talbot, _Earl of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 316.

377. George Clifford, _Earl of_ Cumberland.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 299.

378. Henry Percy, _Earl of_ Northumberland.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 346.

379. Edward Somerset, _Earl of_ Worcester.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 353.

380. Thomas Burogh, _Lord_ Burogh.

  _Azure three Flower Deluces Ermine._

381. Edmond Sheffield, _Lord_ Sheffield, _after Earl of_ Mulgrave.

  _Argent a Chevron between three garbs Gules._

382. _Sir_ Francis Knolles, _Kt._

  _Azure crusily, a Cross moline voided Or._

383. Frederick, _Duke of_ Wirtenbergh.

  _Or three Staggs attires placed Bar-ways Sable_, id est,
    _Wirtenbergh_.

384. Thomas Howard, _Lord_ Howard _of_ Walden, _after Earl of_ Suffolk,
  _and Lord Treasurer of_ England.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 340. with a _Crescent difference_.

385. George Carey, _Lord_ Hunsdon.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 345.

386. Charles Blount, _Lord_ Montjoy, _after Earl of_ Devonshire.

  _Comme_, No. 289.

387. _Sir_ Henry Lea, _Kt._

  _Argent a fess between three Crescents Sable._

388. Robert Ratcliff, _Earl of_ Sussex.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 372.

389. Henry Brook, _Lord_ Cobham.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 367.

390. Thomas Scrope, _Lord_ Scrope _of_ Bolton.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 368.

391. William Stanley, _Earl of_ Derby.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 359.

392. Thomas Cecil, _Lord_ Burghley, _after Earl of_ Exeter.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 356.


            _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ James I.

393. Henry, _Prince of_ Wales.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, France and England quartered; second,
    Scotland, viz. Or a Lyon rampant within a double tressure
    counterflory Gules; third, Ireland, Azure an Harp or String Argent,
    over all a label of three Points Argent._

394. Christian IV. _King of_ Denmark.

  _Denmark, Comme_, No. 364.

395. Lodowich Stewart, _Duke of_ Lenox, _and after Duke of_ Richmond.

  _Quarterly; first_, the Augmentation, _viz. France within a border
    cousu Gules, charged with eight round Buckles Or; second, Or a fess
    checquy, Argent and Azure, a border ingrailed Gules, for Stewart,
    over all in pretence Lenox, viz. Argent a Saltire ingrailed between
    four cinquefoils or roses Gules_.

396. Henry Wriothesley, _Earl of_ Southampton.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 317.

397. John Erskin, _Earl of_ Marr.

  _Azure a bend between six cross Croslets fitchee Or_, his Title of
    _Marr_, his proper Coat, _Argent a pale Sable_.

398. William Herbert, _Earl of_ Pembroke.

  _Parti per Pale, Azure and Gules, three Lyons rampant Argent._

399. Ultrick, _Duke of_ Holstein.

  _Norway, Comme_, No. 344. but the _Lyon_ crowned _Or_.

400. Henry Howard, _Earl of_ Northampton.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 341. _a Crescent difference_.

401. Robert Cecil, _Earl of_ Salisbury.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 392. with a _Crescent difference_.

402. Thomas Howard, _Viscount_ Bindon.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 268. _viz. Howard_ with a _Crescent
    difference_, and without the _label_.

403. George Hinne, _Earl of_ Dunbarr.

  _Vert a Lyon rampant Argent._

404. Philip Herbert, _Earl of_ Montgomery, _after Earl of_ Pembroke.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 398. _a Crescent difference_.

405. Charles Stewart, _Duke of_ York, _after Prince of_ Wales, _and
  King of_ England, _of that Name the first_.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, France and England; second, Scotland;
    third, Ireland; Comme son Frere_, No. 393. _on a label of three
    Points Argent, nine Torteauxes_.

406. Thomas Howard, _Earl of_ Arundel, _after Earl of_ Norfolk.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 340.

407. Robert Carr, _Viscount_ Rochester, _after Earl of_ Somerset.

  _Gules on a Chevron Argent, three Mullets Sable in the dexter chief
    Point, a Lyon of England_, Augmentation and _difference_.

408. Frederick, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine, _Prince Elector of the
  Empire, and after King of_ Bohemia.

  _Quarterly; the Palatinate and Bavaria, Comme_, No. 365. _in
    pretence_ the Augmentation, _viz. Gules an Imperial mound or globe
    Or_.

409. Maurice Van Nassau, _Prince of_ Orange.

  _Azure billettee a Lyon rampant Or_; i. e. _Nassau_.

410. Thomas Ereskine, _Viscount_ Fenton, _after Earl of_ Kelly.

  _Quarterly; first_, the Augmentation _Gules, an imperial Crown within
    a double Tressure counterflory Or; second_, Erskine, _Comme_, No.
    397. with a _Crescent difference_.

411. William Knolles, _Lord_ Knolles, _after Viscount_ Wallingford,
  _and Earl of_ Banbury.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 382.

412. Francis Manners, _Earl of_ Rutland.

  _Comme son Oncle_, No. 366.

413. _Sir_ George Villiers, _Kt. after Baron of_ Whaddon, _then Earl
  and Marquiss of_ Buckingham, _and lastly, Earl of_ Coventry, _and
  Duke of_ Buckingham.

  _Argent on a Cross Gules five Escallops Or, a martlet difference._

414. Robert Sidney, _Viscount_ Lisle, _after Earl of_ Leicester.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 350.

415. James Hamilton, _Marquiss_ Hamilton, _and Earl of_ Cambridge.

  _Gules three cinquefoiles pierced Ermine._

416. Esme Stewart, _Duke of_ Lenox, _and Earl of_ March.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 395.

417. Christian, _Duke of_ Brunswick.

  _Gules two Lyons passant gardant in pale Or_, which is _Brunswick_.

418. William Cecill, _Earl of_ Salisbury.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 401.

419. James Hay, _Earl of_ Carlisle.

  _Argent three Escocheons Gules._

420. Edward Sackvile, _Earl of_ Dorset.

  _Comme son Beau Pere_, No. 373.

421. Henry Rich, _Earl of_ Holland.

  _Gules a Chevron between three Crosses bottonee Or._

422. Thomas Howard, _Viscount_ Andover, _after Earl of_ Barkshire.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 384. _viz. Howard_, with a _Crescent_ on a
    _Crescent difference_.


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Charles I.

423. Claude de Lorrain, _Duke of_ Chevereux.

  _Hungary, viz. Barry of eight Argent and Gules_; his proper Arms
    being _Lorrain, viz. Or on a bend Gules three Alerions_ [_Doves_,
    or as others, _Eaglets_ without _becques_,] _displaid Argent_.

424. Gustavus Adolphus, _King of_ Sweden.

  _Sweden, viz. Azure three Crowns Or._

425. Henry Frederick Van Nassau, _Prince of_ Orange.

  _Nassau, Comme son Frere_, No. 409.

426. Theophilus Howard, _Earl of_ Suffolk.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 384.

427. William Compton, _Earl of_ Northampton.

  _Sable three Helmets Argent with a Lyon of England_ Augmentation in
    _fess_ between them.

428. Richard Weston, _Lord_ Weston, _Lord Treasurer of_ England, _and
  after Earl of_ Portland.

  _Or, an Eagle regardant displaid Sable._

429. Robert Bertie, _Earl of_ Lindsey.

  _Argent three battering Rams proper armed and garnished Or._

430. William Cecil, _Earl of_ Exeter.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 392.

431. James Hamilton, _Marquiss of_ Hamilton, _Earl of_ Cambridge _and_
  Arran.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 415.

432. Charles Lodowick, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine, _Prince Elector
  of the Empire, and Duke of_ Bavaria.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 408.

433. James Stewart, _Duke of_ Lenox, _and Earl of_ March, _after Duke
  of_ Richmond.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 416.

434. Henry Danvers, _Earl of_ Danby.

  _Gules a Chevron between three mullets of six Points Or._

435. William Douglas, _Earl of_ Morton.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, Morton Argent on a chief indented
    Gules, two mullets of the first; second and third, Douglass,
    Comme_, No. 193.

436. Algernon Percy, _Earl of_ Northumberland.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 378.

437. Charles, _Prince of_ Wales, _after King of_ England, _of that Name
  the second_.

  _Comme son Oncle_, No. 393.

438. Thomas Wentworth, _Earl of_ Strafford.

  _Sable a Chevron between three Leopards faces Or._

439. James Stewart, _Duke of_ York, _after King_ James, _of that Name
  the second_.

  _Comme son Frere_, No. 437. _viz._ the national Arms with a _label
    Ermine_.

440. Rupert, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine, _and Duke of_ Bavaria,
  _after Earl of_ Holderness, _and Duke of_ Cumberland, _second Son of
  the King of_ Bohemia.

  _Comme son Frere aisne_, No. 432. but without the Augmentation, No.
    405, _viz. the Palatinate and Bavaria quarterly_.

441. William Van Nassau, _Prince of_ Orange.

  _Nassau, Comme son Pere_, No. 425.

442. Bernard de Nogaret de Foix, _Duke_ de Espernon _and_ de Valette.

  _Quarterly; Castile and Leon, Comme_, No. 331. _in pretence Nogaret,
    viz. Or a Nut-tree eradicated proper impailing Thoulose_, i. e.
    _Gules a Cross urdee voided Or, and pomellee as the Points Or, over
    both Coats a chief of Valette, viz. Gules a Cross potent Argent_.


           _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ Charles II.

443. Maurice, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine, _and Duke of_ Bavaria,
  _third Son of the King of_ Bohemia.

  _Comme son Frere aisne_, No. 440.

444. James Butler, _Marquiss of_ Ormond, _after Earl of_ Brecknock,
  _and Duke of_ Ormond, _in_ Ireland _and_ England.

  _Comme_, No. 370.

445. Edward, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine, _and Duke of_ Bavaria,
  _fifth Son of the King of_ Bohemia.

  _Comme son Frere aisne_, No. 443. _viz. the Palatinate and Bavaria
    quarterly_.

446. George Villiers, _Duke of_ Buckingham.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 413.

447. William Hamilton-Dowglass, _Duke of_ Hamilton.

  _Quarterly; first, Hamilton, Comme_, No. 415. _second, Dowglass,
    Comme_, No. 193.

448. Thomas Wriothesley, _Earl of_ Southampton.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 396.

449. William Cavendish, _Marquiss of_ Newcastle, _after Duke of_
  Newcastle.

  _Sable three Harts heads caboshed Argent, a Crescent difference._

450. James Graham, _Marquiss of_ Montrose.

  _Or on a chief Sable, three escallops of the first._

451. James Stanley, _Earl of_ Darby.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 391.

452. George Digby, _Earl of_ Bristol.

  _Azure a Flower Deluce Argent, a Crescent difference._

453. Henry Stewart, _Duke of_ Gloucester, _third Son to King_ Charles I.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, France and England, Quarterly; second,
    Scotland; third, Ireland, on a label Argent nine Roses of
    Lancaster._

454. Henry Charles de la Tremoville, _Prince_ de Tarente.

  _Arragon, Sicily, viz. parti per Saltire the chief and base Or, four
    pales Gules for Arragon; the second and third, Argent an Eagle
    displaid Sable for Sicily in pretence_, his paternal Arms, _viz.
    Tremoville, Or a Chevron Gules between three Eagles displaid Azure_.

455. William Van Nassau, _Prince of_ Orange, _after King of_ England,
  _of that Name the third_.

  _Nassau, Comme son Pere_, No. 441.

456. Frederick William, _Prince Elector of the_ Empire, _Marquiss of_
  Brandenburgh.

  _Argent an Eagle displaid Gules_, which is _Brandenburgh_.

457. John Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin, _Count de_ Gravil.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, Argent a Fish hauriant Gules; second
    and third, Or two barrs Sable._

458. _Sir_ George Monk, _Kt. after Duke of_ Albermarle.

  _Gules a Chevron between three Lyons Heads erased Argent._

459. _Sir_ Edward Montague, _Kt. after Earl of_ Sandwich.

  _Quarterly, Montague and Monthermer_, _viz._ _Argent three Losenges
    in fess Gules, a border Sable and Or, an Eagle displaid Vert, over
    all a Mullet difference._

460. William Seymour, _Marquiss of_ Hertford, _after Duke of_ Somerset.

  _Comme_, No. 306. _a Crescent difference_.

461. Aubrey de Vere, _Earl of_ Oxford.

  _Comme_, No. 293.

462. Charles Stewart, _Duke of_ Richmond _and_ Lenox.

  _Comme son Oncle_, No. 433.

463. Montague Bertie, _Earl of_ Lindsey.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 429.

464. Edward Montague, _Earl of_ Manchester.

  _Comma son Cousin_, but with a _Crescent difference_.

465. William Wentworth, _Earl of_ Strafford.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 438.

466. Christierne, _Prince of_ Denmark, _after King of_ Denmark.

  _Denmark, Comme_, No. 394.

467. James Scot, _Duke of_ Monmouth _and_ Bucclugh.

  The Imperial Arms of King _Charles_ II. _a baston sinister Argent, In
    pretence, Scot of Bucclugh, viz. Or on a bend Azure, a Crescent
    between two Mullets_.

468. James Stuart, _Duke of_ Cambridge, _Son of_ James, _Duke of_ York.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 439. _viz._ the national Arms, _with a label of
    five Points Ermine_.

469. Charles IX. _King of_ Sweden, Goths _and_ Vandalls.

  _Sweden, Comme_, No. 424.

470. John George II. _Duke of_ Saxony, Juliers, Cleves _and_ Monts,
  _and Prince Elector of the_ Empire.

  _Quarterly; first, Thuringe, viz. a Lyon rampant barry of ten Argent
    and Gules._

471. Christopher Monk, _Duke of_ Albermarle.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 458.

472. John Maitland, _Duke of_ Lauderdale.

  _Or a Lyon rampant dismembred, Gules within a double tressure
    counterflory Azure._

473. Henry Somerset, _Marquiss of_ Worcester, _after Duke of_ Beaufort.

  _Quarterly, France and England, a border gobone Argent and Azure._

474. Henry Jermyn, _Earl of_ St. Albans.

  _Sable a Crescent between two Mullets in pale Argent._

475. William Russell, _Earl of_ Bedford, _after Duke of_ Bedford.

  _Comme_, No. 346.

476. Henry Bennet, _Earl of_ Arlington.

  _Gules between three demi Lyons rampant couped Argent, a besant after
    changed to an imperial mound_, serving for both difference and
    Augmentation.

477. Thomas Butler, _Earl of_ Ossory.

  _Comme son Pere_, No. 444.

478. Charles Fitz Roy, _Earl of_ Southampton, _after Duke of_
  Southampton, _and now Duke of_ Cleveland.

  The Imperial Arms of England, _a Battune Sinister Ermine difference_.

479. John, _Earl of_ Mulgrave, _now Duke of_ Buckingham.

  _Arragon a Chevron between three Garbs Gules._

480. William Cavendish, _Duke of_ Newcastle.

  _Comme_, No. 447.

481. Thomas Osborn, _Earl of_ Danby, _after Duke of_ Leeds.

  _Quarterly, Ermine and Azure a Cross Or._

482. Henry Fitz Roy, _Duke of_ Grafton.

  _The Arms of King_ Charles II. _with a Battoon Sinister Gobony Argent
    and Azure_.

483. William, _Earl of_ Salisbury.

  _Barry of ten Pieces Argent and Azure on six Escocheons Sinister, as
    many Lyons rampant; of the first, a Crescent difference._

484. Charles, _Count Palatine of the_ Rhine.

  _Comme_, No. 445.

485. Charles, _Duke of_ Richmond.

  The Arms of King _Charles_ II. _within a Bordure Gobony Argent and
    Gules, the Argent charg’d with Roses as the second_.

486. George, _Prince of_ Denmark.

  _Denmark, Comme_, No. 466.

487. Charles Seymour, _Duke of_ Somerset, _&c._

  _Quarterly; first_, an Augmentation, _viz. Or on a Pile Gules,
    between six Flower Deluces Azure, three Lyons of England; second_,
    the paternal Coat of _Seymour, Gules, two Wings conjoined in Lure
    Or_.

488. George Fitzroy, _Duke of_ Northumberland.


            _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ James II.

489. Henry Howard, _Duke of_ Norfolk.

  _Comme_, No. 426.

490. Henry Mordaunt, _Earl of_ Peterborough.

  _Argent a Chevron between three Estoils Wavy._

491. Laurence Hyde, _Earl of_ Rochester.

  _Azure, a Chevron between three Lozenges, a Crescent difference._

492. Louis de Duras, _Earl of_ Feversham.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, Gules a Lyon rampant Argent; second and
    third, Argent a bend Azure, with a label of three Points
    difference._

493. Robert Spencer, _Earl of_ Sunderland.

  _Quarterly, Argent and Gules, in second a Fret Or, over all a bend
    Sable, charged with three eschallops of the first._


          _Knights elected in the Reign of King_ William _and
                    Queen_ Mary, _and King_ William.

494. James Butler, _Duke of_ Ormond.

  _Or, a chief indented Azure._

495. Frederick Schonbergh, _Duke of_ Schonbergh.

  _Argent, an Escocheon Sable, over all a Carbuncle of eight Roys Or, a
    Crescent difference._

496. William Cavendish, _Duke of_ Devonshire, _then Earl of_ Devonshire.

  _Sable, three Hearts Heads caboshed, Argent._

497. Charles Sackville, _Earl of_ Dorset _and_ Middlesex.

  _Quarterly, Or and Gules a bend Vaire._

498. Frederick III. _Marquiss of_ Brandenburgh, _Prince Elector, and
  Great Chamberlain of the Holy_ Roman Empire; _after King of_ Prussia.

  _Comme_, No. 456.

499. George-William, _Duke of_ Brunswick _and_ Lunenburg-Zell, _Prince
  of the Holy_ Roman Empire.

500. Charles Talbot, _Duke of_ Shrewsbury.

  _Gules a Lyon rampant, within a border ingrailed Or._

501. _Prince_ William, _Duke of_ Gloucester.

  The Arms of _England, with a label of three Points Argent_, the
    middlemost charged with the _Cross of_ St. _George, and an
    Escocheon_ of his paternal Coat of _Denmark_.

502. John Holles, _Duke of_ Newcastle.

  _Ermine, two Piles_, their Points meeting in _base Sable_.

503. William Bentinck, _Earl of_ Portland.

  _Azure, a Cross Moline Argent._

504. Thomas Herbert, _Earl of_ Pembroke _and_ Montgomery.

  _Comme_, No. 404.

505. Arnoldjoost Van Keppel, _Earl of_ Albermarle.

  _Gules, three eschallops Argent._

506. James Dowglass, _Duke of_ Queensbury _and_ Dover.

  _Quarterly; first and fourth, a Heart Gules, Crown’d with an Imperial
    Crown Or, on a chief, Azure, three Mullets Argent; second and
    third, Azure, a Bend Or, six cross Croslets of the same, all within
    a double Tressure Counterflory Gules._

507. George-Lewis, _Elector of_ Brunswick-Lunenburgh, _&c. the present
  Sovereign_.


             _Knights elected in the Reign of Queen_ ANNE.

508. Wriothesly Russel, _Duke of_ Bedford.

  _Comme_, No. 475.

509. John Churchill, _Duke of_ Marlborough.

  _Sable, a Lyon rampant Argent, on a Canton of the second, St._
    George_’s Cross._

510. Meinhardt Schonbergh, _Duke of_ Schonbergh.

  _Comme_, No. 495.

510. Sidney Godolphin, _Earl of_ Godolphin.

  _Gules, an Eagle with two Heads display’d between 3 Fleurs de Lis
    Argent._

511. George Augustus, _Prince Electoral of_ Hanover, _now Prince of_
  Wales.

512. William Cavendish, _Duke of_ Devonshire.

  _Comme_, No. 496.

513. John Campbell, _Duke of_ Argyle.

  _Girony of eight Pieces, Or and Sable._

514. James Hamilton, _Duke of_ Hamilton _and_ Brandon: _Placed here in
  his Order of Election, but lived not to be installed._

  _Comme_, No. 447.

515. Henry Beaufort, _Duke of_ Somerset.

  _Comme_, No. 473.

516. Henry de Grey, _Duke of_ Kent.

  _Barry of six Argent and Azure._

517. John Poulett, _Earl_ Poulett.

  _Sable, three Swords, their Points in Pile Argent, the Hilts Or._

518. Robert Harley, _Earl of_ Oxford _and Earl_ Mortimer.

  _Or, a bend cotised Sable._

519. Thomas Wentworth, _Earl of_ Strafford.

  _Sable, a Chevron between three Leopards Heads Or._

520. Charles Mordant, _Earl of_ Peterborough _and_ Monmouth.

  _Comme_, No. 490.


                   _Knights elected by King_ George.

521. Charles Poulet, _Duke of_ Bolton.

  _Sable, three Swords, their Points in pile Argent, their Hilts Or, a
    Crescent difference._

522. John Maners, _Duke of_ Rutland.

  _Comme_, No. 412.

523. Lionel-Cranfield Sackvil, _Earl of_ Dorset _and_ Middlesex.

  _Comme_, No. 497.

524. Charles Montague, _Earl of_ Halifax.

  _Argent three Lozenges in fess Gules, within a border Sable
    difference._


              _A Catalogue of the several Officers of this
                    most Noble Order, to this Time._

                        _Prelates of the Order._

1. William de Edyngton, _Bishop of_ Winchester, _Lord Treasurer, and
  after Lord Chancellor of_ England.

2. William de Wykham, _Bishop of_ Winchester, _Priest, Cardinal of St._
  Eusebius, _and Lord Chancellor of_ England.

3. Henry Beaufort, _Bishop of_ Winchester, _Priest, Cardinal_, &c. _and
  Lord Chancellor of_ England.

4. William de Waynfleet, _Bishop of_ Winchester, _and Lord Chancellor
  of_ England.

5. Peter Courtney, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

6. Thomas Langton, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

7. Richard Fox, _Bishop of_ Winchester, _and Lord Privy-Seal_.

8. Thomas Wolsey, _Bishop of_ Winchester, _Priest, Cardinal_, &c. _and
  Lord Chancellor of_ England.

9. Stephen Gardiner, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

10. John Poynet, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

11. Stephen Gardiner _restored, and made Lord Chancellor of_ England.

12. John White, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

13. Robert Horne, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

14. John Watson, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

15. Thomas Cooper, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

16. William Wykham, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

17. William Day, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

18. Thomas Bilson, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

19. James Montague, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

20. Lancelot Andrews, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

21. Richard Neyle, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

22. Walter Curle, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

23. Brian Duppa, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

24. George Morley, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

25. Peter Mew, _Bishop of_ Winchester.

26. _Sir_ Jonathan Trelawny, _Bar. now Bishop of_ Winchester.


                      _Chancellors of the Order._

1. Richard Beauchamp, _Bishop of_ Salisbury, _and Dean of_ Windsor.

2. Lionel Woodevelle, _Bishop of_ Salisbury.

3. Thomas Langton, _Bishop of_ Salisbury.

4. John Blyth, _Bishop of_ Salisbury.

5. Henry Dean, _Bishop of_ Salisbury.

6. Edmond Audley, _Bishop of_ Salisbury.

7. _Sir_ William Cecil, _Kt. Secretary of State_.

8. _Sir_ William Peters, _Kt. Secretary of State_.

9. _Sir_ Thomas Smith, _Kt. Secretary of State_.

10. _Sir_ Francis Walsingham, _Kt. Secretary of State_.

11. _Sir_ Amias Paulet, _Kt. Secretary of State_.

12. _Sir_ John Woolee, _Kt. Secretary for the_ Latin _Tongue_.

13. _Sir_ Edward Dyer, _Kt._

14. _Sir_ John Herbert, _Kt. Secretary of State_.

15. _Sir_ George More, _Kt._

16. _Sir_ Francis Crane, _Kt._

17. _Sir_ Thomas Row, _Kt._

18. _Sir_ James Palmer, _Kt._

19. _Sir_ Henry de Vick, _Bar._

20. Seth Ward, _Bishop of_ Salisbury.

21. Gilbert Burnet, _now Bishop of_ Salisbury.


                       _Registers of the Order._

1. John Coringham, _Canon of_ Windsor.

2. John Deepden, _Canon of_ Windsor.

3. James Goldwell, _Canon of_ Windsor.

4. Oliver King, _Canon of_ Windsor, _Secretary to Prince Henry, Son of
  King_ Henry VI. _To King_ Edward IV., V. _and_ Henry VII.

5. Richard Nix, _Canon of_ Windsor.

6. Christopher Urswick, _Dean of_ Windsor.

7. Thomas Wolsey, _the Kings Almoner_.

8. William Atwater, _Canon of_ Windsor, _after Bishop of_ Lincoln.

9. Nicholas West, _Dean of_ Windsor.

10. John Vescy, _Dean of_ Windsor.

11. Richard Sydnor, _Canon of_ Windsor.

12. Robert Aldridge, _Canon of_ Windsor.

13. Owen Oglethorp, _Dean of_ Windsor.

14. John Boxal, _Dean of_ Windsor, _and Secretary of State_.

15. George Carew, _Dean of_ Windsor.

16. William Day, _Dean of_ Windsor.

17. Robert Benet, _Dean of_ Windsor.

18. Giles Thompson, _Dean of_ Windsor, _and Bishop of_ Gloucester.

19. Anthony Maxey, _Dean of_ Windsor.

20. Marc Antonio de Dominis, _Archbishop of_ Spalato, _Dean of_ Windsor.

21. Henry Beaumont, _Dean of_ Windsor.

22. Matthew Wren, _Dean of_ Windsor.

23. Christopher Wren, _Dean of_ Windsor.

24. Brune Ryves, _Dean of_ Windsor.

25. _Dr._ Gregory Heskard, _Dean of_ Windsor.

26. _Dr._ John Robinson, _Dean of_ Windsor, _since Bishop of_ London.

27. _Dr._ George Verney, _Lord_ Willoughby _of_ Brook, _now Dean of_
  Windsor.


                        _Garters King of Arms._

1. _Sir_ William Brugges, _Kt._

2. John Smert.

3. _Sir_ John Writh, _Kt._

4. _Sir_ Thomas Wriothesley, _Kt._

5. _Sir_ Thomas Wall, _Kt._

6. _Sir_ Christopher Barker, _Kt._

7. _Sir_ Gilbert Dethick, _Kt._

8. _Sir_ William Dethick, _Kt._

9. _Sir_ William Segar, _Kt._

10. _Sir_ John Borough, _Kt._

11. _Sir_ Henry St. George, _Kt._

12. _Sir_ Edward Walker, _Kt._

13. _Sir_ William Dugdale.

14. _Sir_ Thomas St. George.

15. _Sir_ Henry St. George.


                       _Ushers of the Black-Rod._

1. William Whitehorse.

2. John Cray.

3. Thomas Sye.

4. John Athelbrig.

5. William Evington, _and_ Edward Hardgyll.

6. Robert Marleton.

7. Ralph Ashton, _and_ Hugh Dennys.

8. _Sir_ William Compton, _Kt._

9. Henry Norresse, _Esq;_

10. Anthony Knyvet, _Esq;_

11. _Sir_ Philip Hobby, _Kt._

12. John Norres, _and_ William Norres, _Esqs;_

13. Anthony Wingfield, _Esq;_

14. Richard Coningsbye, _Esq;_

15. James Maxwell, _Esq;_

16. Peter Newton, _Esq;_

17. _Sir_ John Ayton, _Kt._

18. _Sir_ Edward Carteret, _Kt._

19. _Sir_ Thomas Duppa.

20. _Sir_ Fleetwood Shepard.

21. _Sir_ David Mitchell.

22. _Sir_ William Oldes.




                               APPENDIX.

     _The Statutes of Institution of the most Noble_ Order _of the_
    Garter, _as they were reform’d and explain’d by King_ Henry VIII.


Whereas the moost famous, moost happiest, and victorious Prynce
_Edwarde_, the thirde of that Name, his Noble Progenitour sometyme Kyng
of _England_ and of _Fraunce_, and Lord of _Irland, &c._ To th’ onnoure
of Almighti God, and of the Blessed and Immaculate Virgyn _Marie_, and
the Blessed Martir Sainte _George_, Patron of the right Noble Roialme
of _England_; and of Saynt _Edwarde_, Kyng and Confessour; To the
exaltation of the holy Faith Catholique, ordeyned, established,
created, and founded within the Castel of _Wyndesore_, a Company of
twenty six Noble and Worthi Knyghtes, for to be of the said moost Noble
Ordre of Saynt _George_, named the Gartier, and for the honourable
continuance, augmentation, and interteyning of the same.

The seid moost victorious Kyng did devyse and institute divers
honorable Estatuts, and laudable Ordinances, for to be observed and
kept by the Cobrethren and Confreres, Knyghtes and Compaynons of the
said moost Noble Ordre; amonge the which Estatutis been certeyne
doubtis and ambiguities, which to be more playnly declared, interpreted
and extended, it is thought right necessary and expedient, and that
certeyne other new Ordinances and Articles be to the said Statutes
added and adjoyned. Wherefore the said moost excellent and victorious
Prynce _Henry_ VIII. Kyng of _England_ and of _Fraunce_, Defensor of
the Faith, and Lord of _Irland_, and Soverayne of the said moost Noble
Order; and for the right singular Love, good Zeal, ardent and intier
Affection that his Royall Majestie hath and bearith to the said moost
Noble Order, and to the Estate of Chivalrie and Knyghthood, and for the
honorable contynuance and encreasing the same. And also at the humble
requeste and instante desire of the Knyghts and Companyons of the said
Noble Order, and by their Advyse, Councell and Assent, the twenty third
Day of _April_, in the Year of Grace MDXXII. and of his moost Noble
Reign the eighth Year, made interpretacion and declaracion of the
Obscurities, Doubtis, and Ambiguities, of the said Estatutes,
Ordinances, Interpretacions, Declaracions, Reformacions, with their
additions aforesaid, after the trew intencion of them, shall be from
henceforth observed, kept and ensued by the Soverayne, and the Knyghtes
Confreres and Companyons of the said Noble Order, in manner and fourme
following.

I. Firste, It is ordened and accorded, That the Kyng and his Heires and
Successors, Kyngs of _England_, shall be for evermore Soveraynes of the
saide moost Noble Order and amiable Companye of Saynt _George_, named
the Gartier, to the which Soverayn, and to his Heires and Successours,
shall apperteine the Declaracion, Solucion, Determinacion,
Interpretacion, Reformacion, and disposition of all Causes, concernyng
and towchyng any thing of Obscuritie or Dowbte conteyned in the
Statutes of the said moost Noble Order.

II. _Item_, It is accorded, That none shall be elected and chosen for
to be Fellow or Companyon of the said moost Noble Order, except that he
be a Gentilman of Blood, and that he be a Knyghte, and without
reproche. And that the Knyghtes of the said Noble Order, from
hensforth, shall not Name any Person in their Election to be Felow or
Companyon of the said Noble Order, in whom thei shall thynke or extiem
in their Conscience to have Spotte of Reproche. And as towchyng the
Declaracion of a Gentilman of Blode, it is declared and determined that
he shall be descended of three decentis of Noblesse, that is to say, of
Name and of Arms, both of his Father’s side, and also of his Mother’s
side. And as towchyng or concernyng any manner of reproche, forasmoche
as there be divers and many sundry Poyntis of reproche, there shall be
here declared but three Poyntes of them oonly, as it is declared in
manner and fourme folowyng.


A List of all the present _Knights-Companions_ of the most Noble Order
  of the _Garter_; as their Places occur in their _Stalls_ in the Royal
  Chappel of St. _George_, within the College of _Windsor_: Shewing the
  respective Times of their Installations.

 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |                                   ||                                  |
 |        The Sovereign’s Side       ||        The Prince’s Side         |
 |                                   ||                                  |
 +------++---------------------------++--------------------------++------+
 |      ||                           ||                          ||      |
 +------++---------------------------++--------------------------++------+
 |3.    ||1. _The Sovereign_, George,||2. George-August, _Prince || 4.   |
 |      ||  _King of_ Great-Britain, ||  of_ Wales, _&c.         ||      |
 |      ||  France _and_ Ireland;    ||  installed_ December 22d,||      |
 |      ||  _installed_ March 13.    ||  1706. 5 _Queen_ Anne.   ||      |
 |      ||  1702-3. 2 _Queen_ Anne.  ||                          ||      |
 +------++---------------------------++--------------------------++------+
 |5. Charles Fitzroy, _Duke of_      ||6. John Sheffield, _Duke of_      |
 |  Cleveland _and_ Southampton, _&c.||  Buckingham _and_ Normanby, _&c. |
 |  installed_ April _the first_,    ||  installed_ May _28th_, 1674.    |
 |  1673. 25 Charles II.             ||  26 Charles II.                  |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |7. Charles Lenox, _Duke of_        ||8. Charles Seymour, _Duke of_     |
 |  Richmond, _&c. installed_        ||  Somerset, _&c. installed_ April |
 |  April _20th_, 1681.              ||  _8th_, 1684. 36 Charles II.     |
 |  33 Charles II.                   ||                                  |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |9. George Fitzroy, _Duke of_       ||10. James Butler, _Duke of_       |
 |  Northumberland, _&c. installed_  ||  Ormond, _&c. installed_         |
 |  April _8th_, 1684. 36 Charles II.||  April _5th_, 1689.              |
 |                                   ||  1 William _and_ Mary.           |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |11. Charles Talbot, _Duke of_      ||12. Thomas Herbert, _Earl of_     |
 |  Shrewsbury, _&c. installed_ June ||  Pembroke _and_ Montgomery, _&c. |
 |  _5th_, 1694. 6 William _and_     ||  installed_ May _14th_, 1700.    |
 |  Mary.                            ||  12 William III.                 |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |13. Arnold Joost Van Keppel, _Earl ||14. John Churchill, _Duke of_     |
 |  of_ Albemarle, _&c. installed_   ||  Marlborough, _&c. installed_    |
 |  May _14th_, 1700. 12 William III.||  March _13th_, 1702-3.           |
 |                                   ||  2 _Queen_ Anne.                 |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |15. Meinhardt Schonbergh, _Duke of_||16. William Cavendish, _Duke of_  |
 |  Schonbergh; _installed_ September||  Devonshire, _&c. installed_     |
 |  _2d_, 1703. 2 _Queen_ Anne.      ||  December _22d_, 1710.           |
 |                                   ||  9 _Queen_ Anne.                 |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |17. John Campbel, _Duke of_ Argyle,||18. Henry de Grey, _Duke of_ Kent,|
 |  _&c. installed_ December _22nd_, ||  _&c. installed_ August _4th_,   |
 |  1710. 9 _Queen_ Anne.            ||  1713. 12 _Queen_ Anne.          |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |19. John Poulett, _Earl_ Poulett,  ||20. Robert Harley, _Earl of_      |
 |  _&c. installed_ August _4th_,    ||  Oxford, _and Earl_ Mortimer,    |
 |  1713. 12 _Queen_ Anne.           ||  _&c. installed_ August _4th_,   |
 |                                   ||  1713. 12 _Queen_ Anne.          |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |21. Thomas Wentworth, _Earl of_    ||22. Charles Mordant, _Earl of_    |
 |  Strafford, _&c. installed_ August||  Peterborough _and_ Monmouth,    |
 |  _4th_, 1713. 12 _Queen_ Anne.    ||  _&c. installed_ August _4th_,   |
 |                                   ||  1713. 12 _Queen_ Anne.          |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |23. Charles Poulet, _Duke of_      ||24. John Maners, _Duke of_        |
 |  Bolton, _&c. installed_ December ||  Rutland, _&c. installed_        |
 |  _9th_, 1714. 1 _King_ George.    ||  December _9th_, 1714.           |
 |                                   ||  1 _King_ George.                |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+
 |25. Lionel-Cranfield Sackvil, _Earl||26. Charles Montague, _Earl of_   |
 |  of_ Dorset _and_ Middlesex;      ||  Halifax, _&c. installed_        |
 |  _installed_ December _9th_, 1714.||  December _9th_, 1714. 1 _King_  |
 |  1 _King_ George.                 ||  George.                         |
 +-----------------------------------++----------------------------------+

The first Poynt of Reproche ys, That if any Knyght (as God defende) be
convaynqued or attaynted of Errour against the Cristen Faith
Catholique, or had for any suche Offence suffred any Payne or Punicion
publique.

The second Poynt of Reproche is, That if any Knyght (as God defende)
had been arrayned, convicted, or attainted of High Treason.

The third Poynt of Reproche is, That if any Knyght departe or flee away
from Batayle or Journei, beyng with his Soverayne Lord, his Lieutenant
or Deputie, or other Capetayne having the Kyng’s Power Royal and
Auctoritie; and whereas Banners Estandatz, or Pennons, have bene
displaied, and that thei preceded to Fight, he that then reniously and
cowardly flieth or departeth away from thens, ought to be esteemed and
judged to have reproche, and never worthi to be elected Knyght of the
said Company, (as God forbidde) do commytte any such reproche; that
then he shall be departed and disgraded of the said Order, at the next
Chaptier ensuyng, if it soo shall please the Soverayne and the Company.

III. _Item_, That every Yere upon the Vigill of Saynt _George_, that is
to say, the twenty second Day of the Month of _April_, on what Day
soever it fall on, and tho’ no Service of Saynt _George_ be celebrate
or done, all the Knyghts of the said Company beyng in any Place or
Places of their Liberties, in what Places soever it be, shall be bounde
for to were the hole Habit of the said Order; that is to wit, Robe,
Mantell, Hudde, and Coller, from the owre of the first Even Songe, at
the owre of _Tierce_, that is, at three of the Clocke at Afternone,
untill the said Even Songe, and other Devyne Service, Souper, and
Voydance, be done and accomplished; and likewyse on the Morrow on Saynt
_George_’s _Day_ at Matens, Procession, [1] Mass, and the seconde Even
Songe and all the said Day, untyll that Souper and Voydance be done, as
ys aforesaid.

Footnote 1:

  _Divine Service._

IV. _Item_, That if for any Causes it should please the said Soverayne
to proroge the said Feast and Solemnytie of Saint _George_, or that the
said Feast shuld be prolonged and proroged to another Day, that all the
Knyghtis of the said Order, that shall be within the Realme of
_England_, shall gyve their Attendance the Even and the Day of Saynt
_George_, on the Parson of the said Soverayne, and shall fynde
themselffes in his Company, in what Place soever he be within the said
Realme of _England_, and they so gyving their Attendance upon his said
Parson the said Even and Day, shall observe and kepe the Servyce of
Saynt _George_, if the Ordenance and Commaundement of holye Church doth
suffre and permit it, and if the Ordenaunce of the Church doth not
permit it, in this behalfe they be bound to tarry with the Soverayne,
and heare such Servyce as all be than limited and ordened by the holy
Churche to be done and celebrated, the said Even and Day of Saynt
_George_, in observyng and kepyng, duryng the said Daies, of all other
Ceremonies, aswell in goyng to the Chapter upon the said Even before
Even Song at Afternone, and the said Day of Saynt _George_ at
Afternone, before the laste Even Songe, and also in weryng their hole
Habit; and every Knyght beyng in his own Stall in kepyng the Devine
Servyce, from the tyme of the fyrst Even Song of the said Even, Matens
and [2] Masse, unto the last Even Song of the said Day, and the Morrow
after ensuying before the [3] Masse of _Requiem_, they shall take their
Mantells, upon suche Gownes as shall please them, and shall enter into
the Chapter, if there be eny Election or other great Affaires, before
the said [4] Masse of _Requiem_, in using such Ceremonyes to this
accustomed, as though they were present in the said Castell of
_Wyndesore_. And in case that the said Soverayne be come, and entred
into the said Chapiter, and that some of the seid Felows of the said
Order be not entred or come with hym, and shulde tary behynde, in case
they that have not gyven and done dew Attendance upon hym, shall abide
withoute the Dores of the said Chapiter, without entryng into it,
duryng all the tyme that the said Soverayne and other Knyghtes shall be
in the said Chapter for that tyme. And if so be that eny of the
above-named Knyghtes come to late to the first Even Song of the said
Even or Mattens [5] Masse, or laste Even Song, the said Day of Saynt
_George_, he shall have for Penance, that during the tyme and space of
such Devyne Servyce he shall knele or stande before his Stall in the
Place of the Queresters; and if he come not to gyve Attendance upon the
Parson of the said Soverayne the sayd Even and Day of Saynt _George_ as
is aforesaid, and that he have no Lycence or other reasonable Excuse,
and that it be acceptable to the said Soverayne; for his absence in
this Case, the said Knyght that soo shall have done, for his Penance,
shall not come in his Stall at the next Feast ensuyng, in the presence
of the Soverayne, nor in his said Stall in the said College of
_Wyndesore_; and farthermore shall Pay ten Pounds, for to be converted
and bestowed to the use of the Ornaments of the said College.

Footnote 2:

  _Divine Service._

Footnote 3:

  _Divine Service._

Footnote 4:

  _Divine Service._

Footnote 5:

  _Divine Service._

V. _Item_, If it chaunsed that any of the Knyghtes of the said Order,
by Leave or Licens, or otherwise, were in his House, or in any other
Place, at his Libertie and Fraunchise, the said Even and Day of Saynt
_George_, he shall be bound to cause to be prepared a Capitall Stall in
the Church or Chappel in the which he shall heare Devine Service. In
the Capitall Stall shall be sett and elevated the Order of Saynt
_George_, named the Gartier, beyng within the Gartier; and his propre
Arms, within the Gartier also shall be set at a Stall that shall be
asmoche in distance, after the proportion and quantity of the said
Church or Chappel, from the Stall of the said Soverayn, as is his Stall
in the Castle of _Wyndesore_, and shall were his said Habit hole, and
shall heare the Devyne Service, suche as by the Holy Church is ordened
and limited for the said Day, as well the first Even Song Mattens [6]
Masse, as the latter Even Songe. In doyng by him, first Reverence to
the Aulter, in the Honor of God, and after to the Stall where is fixed
or set up the Armes of the said Order, as well and as often at his
comyng in, as at his goyng owte of the said Church or Chappel; and also
as often as he shall passe before the said Armes allwey, excepte the
Emperours, Kynges, Princes, and Electors. The which may in this case so
ordeyne their Seats and Stalles, as that shall seme them beast, and at
their Pleasure.

Footnote 6:

  _Divine Service._

VI. _Item_, If that were so, that without any Prorogation the said
Feast and Solempnyte of Saynt _George_ were kept and celebrated the
said Day and Even of Saynt _George_, in the said Castell of
_Wyndesore_; and if it were not the Pleasure of the said Soverayne for
to be present, or that conveniently he may not be there in Parson the
said Day and Feast, at his said Castell of _Wyndesore_; That in this
Case, in what Place that his Pleasure shall be, beyng within this his
Realme of _England_, his Majestie may appoynte and Commande suche
Knyghtes of the seid Order as best shall seme hym, there for to kepe
Company and geve Attendance upon the Parson, and to kepe all and lyke
Ceremonyes as though they were at the said Castell of _Wyndesore_; and
they doyng the thynges abovesaid, shall be excused for their absence of
the Feast of Saynt _George_, holden at the said Castell of _Wyndesore_
for that Yere.

VII. _Item_, It is agreed that if the Soverayne cannot be at Saynt
_George_’s Feast, that he shall make his Deputy, by his Letters, for to
kepe the Chapter upon Saynt _George_’s Even, at the Owre of _Tierce_,
the which is at three of the Clocke at Afternone, and on Saynt
_George_’s Day, to kepe the said Feast at the Costes of the said
Soverayne for the space abovesaid, without any new Ordenance to be
made, havyng Power to correcte and redresse all Poynts of the said
Chapter as for then shall seme necessary.

VIII. _Item_, That every one on Saynt _George_’s Even, that is to wit,
the twenty second Day of _April_, a gatheryng together shall be made of
all the Knyghtes of Saynt _George_ within the Castell of _Wyndesore_,
that is to wit, of all them that shall be within this Realme of
_Englande_ or withoute, that conveniently may come; and there they
shall have the Service of Saynt _George_, and also shall were their
hole Habit of the said Order, duryng the seid Servyce, being ordinarily
in theyre Stalls. And every of them shall have his Banner, Sworde, with
his Helme and Creste, above his Stall, the which, duryng his Lyff,
shall abyde in the said Chappell for his Honor, and in Signe and
Knowledge that he beres them in defence of holy Churche, as the Order
of Knyghthod requireth. But in Case that the seid Feast of Saynt
_George_ happen to fall within fifteen Days after the Feast of
_Easter_, or upon any Fyshe-Daye or Fastyng-Day, then shall it be
proroged and prolonged at the Soverayn’s Pleasure, as above is said, if
so be that the Day of the seid Feast be not assigned nor ordeyned to be
kepte the twenty fourth, twenty fifth, twenty sixth, nor the last Day
of _April_, nor upon the fowre first Dayes of _May_, for by cause of
the impediment or let of Devyne Servyce ordened by Holy Churche, for
the double Feasts of Saynt _Marke_, _Philipp_ and _Jacob_, and the
invention of the Holy Cross of our Lord Jesu Chryste, nor at such Dayes
as shall fall the Assencion, or the Feast of _Pentecoste_, or any other
Feaste of Solempnitie as is ordened in Holy Churche, whereby the fyrst
or second Even Songe, by suche Prorogacions, might be letted or
distorbed.

IX. _Item_, That all the Knyghtes of the said Order shall come Yerely
in the said Place of the said Castell of _Wyndesore_, on Saynt
_George_’s Even, at the Owre of _Tierce_, the which is at three of the
Clocke at Afternoone, as it is abovesaid; and if thei come not at the
tyme assigned, without havyng a juste and reasonable Excuse, that they
may be acceptable to the said Soverayne or to his Deputy, or otherwyse
pardoned by the said Soverayne, of their absence, by special Letters of
Excuse, in the whiche Letters theyr Names and Causes shall be wryten,
or otherwyse shall have their Pennance after the Ordenaunce and
Agreement of the said Chapter; And the said Ordenaunce is such, that
they shall not entre into the Chaptre for that tyme, but shall byde
without the Dore, and shall have Voyce in any thynge that is done in
the said Chapter at that tyme allonly; and if they come not to Even
Songe before the begynnyng of the said Even Songe, they shall not enter
into their Stalles, but shall byde belowe affore the said Stallis, in
the Queristers Places, duryng the said Even Songe; and like Pennance is
ordened for them that come not to the High [7] Masse betyme, and at
Even Songe on St. _George_’s Daye. And if there be any that come not to
the Feaste, and have not a reasonable Excuse towarde the Soverayne or
his Deputye, as is above declared, his Pennance shall bee, that he
shall not enter within his Stalle the next Feaste after, but shall byde
below, as it is said at the first Even Songe, and shall goo in the
Procession before all the [8] three Crosses, and shall sit below as
afore is said, all the [9] Masse tyme, untyl the Offering, and he shall
Offer laste; and after his Pennance so done, incontinent he shall come
before the Soverayn’s Stalle, or his Deputye, and there he shall aske
Pardon; and after that, the Soverayne or his Deputye shall Command hym
to goo unto his Stalle in his fyrst Estate; and if he come not to the
seconde Feaste, and be dwellyng within the Realm, without having any
Excusation alowable to the Soverayne or his Deputye, as is abovesaid,
he shall not enter into his Stalle from thenceforth, until the tyme
that he hath gyven and offered a Jewell unto Saynte _George_’s Aultar,
within the said Chappell, of the valew of twenty Markes of Silver of
Troye, and fro thensforwarde, he shall double every Yere the Penaltie,
unto the tyme he be reconsciled.

Footnote 7:

  _Morning Service._

Footnote 8:

  _Queristers._

Footnote 9:

  _Divine Service._

X. _Item_, It is agreed, That if any Knyghte of the sayd Companye be
founde in apperte without his Garter, that he pay anon, after that the
Chalenge be made to hym by any of the five Officers of the Order, or of
the Warden of the seid College, a Marke of Money, except he be boted
for to ryde, that then it shall suffice to were under his bote a blew
Ribande of Sylke, in signyfying of the Garter, and also provided that
no Knyght of the seid Order from hensforthe, do entre into the Chaptre
without his Garter, upon the Payne abovesaid; and whosoever of the said
Officers or Warden shall make the fyrst Chalence, shall have the
Penaltye for his Labor.

XI. _Item_, It is agreed, That the Knyghts of the Order of St.
_George_, alway, and as often as they were theyr Mantels, they shall
goo before there Soverayne, every of them with his Felow, that is for
aneynst him ordinarily as they be set in their Stalls. And if it should
happen that eny of them were not there present, his Felow for aneynst
hym shall goe alone, the which Order shall be kepte and observed, as
well in goyng in Procession as elliswhere in other Places. But at the
Offryng, the Soverayne or his Deputye shall goo before all the Company,
and the ordinaire Officers of the said Order shall goo as they have
bene accustomed, when any Procession shall be done in the Chapter,
Chappell, or elliswhere. And for the Order of the said Knyghtes for to
sitt at the Table, for to take their refeccion by it at Dinner, or at
Souper, they shall sitt all along on one side after there Stalles, and
not after there State, except Children or Bretherne of Kinges, Princes,
and Dukes, that be Strangers, the which shall kepe their Places and
Romes after their Astate; and at their voiding and going out shall
abide and goo in Order, so as thei sat at the Table.

XII. _Item_, It is agreed, That every one of them at the Castell of
_Wyndesore_, on the Morrow after the Feast of Saynt _George_, before
the departyng of the Company, that the said Knyghtes, upon such Gownes
as shall please them, at the Chapter Dore, shall take their Mantels,
and shall goo into the said Chapter, and after that shall goo and here
a [10] Masse of _Requiem_, the which shall be Solempnely songe for the
Souls of all the Felows of the said Order, which be departed and
deceassed, and for all Christen Sowlles; and that all the Company be
there present, without eny of them be lett bi a reasonable Cause, or
have Lysence of the Soverayne or his Deputie before the departyng; and
when it happens that for any Cause of the voydyng of eny of the said
Felowship, there shall be certayne Banners, Swordes, Helmets, and
Crestes, the which ought to be offered up before the offeryng of eny
Silver, the said Hachements ought to be offered, fyrst the Banner, by
two of the seid Felowship, such as the Soverayne or his Deputye shall
appoynte or name, and after that the Sworde shall be offered by two
other, and likewise his Helmet and Crest by two other Knyghtes of the
seid Order, assigned by the Soverayne or his Deputye; and if any
Knyghte of the seid Order shuld decease the Yere afore, then every
Knyghte beyng in the said Castell of _Wyndesore_, at the said [11]
Masse of _Requiem_, shall offer a Tapre armed with a little Scuchion,
of the Arms of the Knyghte departed; and if there were more then one
deceassed, that then be made for every of them a Scuchion of Arms, and
a grote sett nye to the light of the Tapre, the which Scuchions and
Tapers shall be made at the Coste and Charge of the Knyghts of the seid
Order.

Footnote 10:

  _Divine Service._

Footnote 11:

  _Divine Service._

XIII. _Item_, It is agreed, That all Strangers that shall be electe
Felowes of the seid Order, shall be certifyed by Letters of the
Soverayne of their Election. The which Letters of Certification, with
the Statutes of the seid Order, under the common Seal, shall be sent
unto them, at the Coste and Charges of the seid Soverayne, in all
diligence, and at the fardest thei shall be certifyed of this within
foure Moneths after the seid Election, to the end that the seid Electe
may advyse them by the seid Statutis, if they will receyve the seid
Order or no. But if the seid Soverayne have greate and high Lettes and
Busynes, that then he may deferre the Certification of the seid
Election at his good Pleasure, unto tyme of opportunitie and
convenient. After that the Certification have byn delivered, and that
the Soverayne shall be certefied that the said Electe will receyve the
said Order; Then the Soverayne shall sende unto the said Electe by his
Ambassadours his hole Habit, with the Gartier and Coller; and that all
such Strangers, of what Estate, Dignytie, or Condicion, that they be
of, shall sende within seven Moneths after the reception of the said
Gartier, Coller, and Habit, and that he have certified the Soverayne to
have reseyved those thyngs, a sufficient Deputye or Attorney, after the
Astate of his Lorde and Maister, so be that he be a Knyghte without
Reproche, to be stalled in his place; the whiche shall bryng with him a
Mantell of blew Velvett, of the Order of that which he shall send him,
and also his Banner, Sworde, Helme, and Crest, for to be and abide
within the said College duryng his Lyff. And that the Mantell, in the
tyme that the said Deputye or Attorney shall be stalled by the
Soverayne or his Deputye, put upon his right Arme, for to hold the said
Mantell upon his Arme, and shall be accompanyed and ledd by two of the
Knyghtes of the said Order, from the Dore of the Chapter unto the
Stalle, and there beyng shall make his Oath, and shall be stalled for,
and in the Name of his said Lorde and Maister, and the said Mantell
abovesaid, the said Attorney or Deputye shall bere it upon his right
Arme duryng the Devyne Servyce; beyng sett in the Stalle of his said
Maister and Lorde without beryng of it at any tyme after: And to have
no manner of Voyce in the Chaptre, or to come in it, in the absence of
hym that hath sent hym. And if he send not his said Attorney within
seven Moneths abovesaid, without havyng a reasonable Excuse, which
shall be acceptable to the Soverayne or his Deputye, the Election shall
be void of hym; except so be, that the said Knyghte be lett and
distorbed by great Affaires; then he may send his Excuse to the said
Soverayne, or to his Deputye, within a Moneth after; and after he is,
as the Soverayne or his Deputye will allowe it, or accepte it, that
then the said Soverayne or his Deputye, may geve unto hym four Moneths
more of respite; and if he came not or sent not his Attorney, before
that the tyme of the four Moneths be fynished, that then in this case
the Election shall be hole voyde from hym for that tyme. And it is to
be knowne, that this Favoure is done and shewed to the Strangers, the
which may not well come in their proper Parsons, that they myght be
stalled by Attourneys; to the ende that they may be parretakers of the
[12] Masses, and all the Prayers of the seid Order, for they shoulde
fayle of the half, yf they were not stalled before their Deathe. And
likewise it is ordened for them that be never Chosen and electe of the
said Order, beyng in the Kyngs Warres by his Commaundement, for to
enjoy of the Benefytes of the said Statutes, to that that shall
appertayne allonly to their Stallacion.

Footnote 12:

  _Divine Service._

XIV. _Item_, There is also ordened a Dean and Warden, with twelve
Cannons Seculers, the which shall be Pristz at their entryng in, or
ells within a Yere nexte folowyng; and also eight Peticanons and twelve
Vicars, also Prestes at their entryng in, or ells at the gyvyng of the
next Orders, or at the furdest within a Yere after their Presentacion;
also thirteen Clerkes and thirteen Queristers, for to syng and Pray
unto God for the prosperity of the Soverayne and all the Knyghtes of
the said Order lyving, and also for the Sowles of all the Knyghtes of
the said Order departed, and for all Crysten Sowles; and the
Presentation of the said Cannons shall belonge allway to the Soverayne
of the said Order; and the said Cannons, when any Knyghte of the said
Order is there present within the Quyer of the said Chappel, shall sitt
in the lowermost Seates, where they be wonte to sitt at the Feastes of
Saynt _George_; and in the absence of the said Knyghtes, the said
Cannons may sitt in the high Seates nexte unto the Stalles of the said
Knyghtes.

XV. _Item_, There be ordened five Officers appertaynyng to the said
Order; that is to witt, Prelate, Chaunceler, Register, and Kyng of
Armes, named Gartier, and an Huysher at Armes, named the Blacke-Rod;
the which shall be receyved and Sworne to be of the Councell of the
said Order; the Secretes, with alsoo their Charges and Privileges,
shall expressely be declared in the Booke of the Ordenances of the said
Officers.

XVI. _Item_, It is also ordened, That thirteen pore Knyghtes, that have
not wherwithall to lyve, for to have in that Place their lyvyng and
sustentacion conveniently, for their good Prayers in the Honor of God
and Saynt _George_, of the which the Charges and Privileges hereafter
shall be declared folowyng: The Ordynances of the Officers and of their
Election is ordened, as of the Presentacion of the Cannons, so that
allway the Election shall abyde to the said Soverayne; and it is agreed
that the pore Knyghtes shall have their Mantells of Scarlett, and a
Scuchion of the Armes of Saynt _George_, without a Gartier.

XVII. _Item_, It is agreed, That every Knyghte of the said Company
shall leave his Mantell within the said College, for any sodayne
Chaunses that myght happen, for to kepe, holde and observe, all suche
Ordenances, Precepts and Commaundements, which may be advysed in
Chapter by the said Sovereign. The which Soverayne, by the Consent and
Agrement of six Knyghtes of the said Order, may at all Tymes and
Places, at his Pleasure, Sommon and make to be kepte Chaptre for all
suche Causes, as it shall please to the said Soverayne to name,
towching the said Order.

XVIII. _Item_, It is agreed, That if it fortune, that any of the said
Companye shulde come within eleven Myle of the Castell, that he shall
goo in, if he may, for the Honor of the Place, if he be not busied or
lett by some juste Cause, and that he take his Mantell before he entre
within the said Chappell; and alsoo that he enter not in, but he have
his Mantell upon hym; and the Cannons there beyng present for that
tyme, shall come to receyve hym, and devotly shall bring hym into the
said Chappel; and if it be in tyme of [13] Masse, he shall tarry and
heare Masse in the Honor of God and of Saynt _George_; and if it be at
Afternone, he shall come in, in manner abovesaid; and there shall be
said by the Cannons _de Profundis_, for all Cristen Sowles, and there
shall offer and returne to his Stalle; and if any of the said Companye
ride thorowgh the Town, and wyll not offer as agreed, that upon his
Obedience for every tyme that he faileth, he shall goe one Myle a Fote
from the said Chappell unto the said Place, in Honor of Saynt _George_;
and also for every tyme that he shall so fayle, he shall gyve a Grote
for his Offrynge; the which distance, for to come nygh unto the said
Castell, is two Myles allonly and no more.

Footnote 13:

  _Divine Service._

XIX. _Item_, It is accorded the thirty second Yere of our Soverayne
Lorde Kynge _Henry_ VIII. by the Grace of God, Kynge of _Englande_ and
of _Fraunce_, Defensor of the Faithe, Lorde of _Irland_, _&c._ upon
Saynt _George_’s Day, the twenty third Day of _Aprill_, at a Chapter
holden at the Paleys of _Westminster_, by the Soverayne and the
Companyons of the said Noble Order then there assembled; That as sone
as the deth of any of the Company of the said Order shall be certeynly
knowen, every of the rest, beyng no Strangiers, shall, accordyng to the
rates of their Degrees hereafter specified, immediately, upon a demande
to be made for the same by the Register and the Dean, or one of them,
to be by one of them employed in Aulmes Deeds, as in mendyng of High
Wayes, or such other Workes of Charitie, as the Kyng’s Majestie from
tyme to tyme shall lymite and appoynte, the severall Somes of Money
ensuyng. Furst, The Soverayne, eight Pounds six Shillings and eight
Pence; a King of another Realme, six Pounds thirteen Shillings and four
Pence; the Prince, five Pounds sixteen Shillings and eight Pence; a
Duke, five Pounds; a Marquess, three Pounds fifteen Shillings; an Erle,
fifty Shillings; a Visconte, forty one Shillings and eight Pence; a
Baron, thirty three Shillings and four Pence; a Bacheler Knyghte,
sixteen Shillings and eight Pence. Of all which Somes thus to be
receyved, the said Dean and Regester, or eyther of them, shall yerely,
at the Chapter, present his Accompte to the Kyng’s Majestie, with his
true and juste declaracion of disbursyng agayne, and defraying of the
same. In that Cause the Partie whose Porcyon shall apere to be unpayde,
shall in the Name of a Payne add unto his former Dutye another thirde
parte of the same, and so for every Yere that he shall be behynde, to
pay a thirde parte more than he shuld pay if he shuld satisfye his
Ordinary, accordyng to the rate before expressed; and if the Dean or
Register, or any of them, shall not at every suche Chapter present the
Certificate of the Receipts and Payments in fourme aforesaid, whereby
the same may apere to the Soverayne and Companyons of the Order then
present, or at the leest he in whome the defawlt shall rest, shall in
the Name of a Payne contente and paye immediately, to be employed
abowte like purpose as afore, the Some of ten Pounds for every such
defaulte.

XX. _Item_, It is agreed, That if any of the said Companye die, that
the Soverayne or his Deputie, after that they shall have certification
of his Deth, shall be bounde for to send and gyve knowlege by ther
Letters to all the Felowship of the said Order, beyng within
_Englande_, for to come and be with the said Soverayne or his Deputie,
in what place soever it be, where it shall please hym to assigne,
convenyently within six Wekys after the certification of the Deth or
Decease of the said Knyghte; the which allsoo assembled, or at the lest
six, with the Soverayne or his Deputie abovesaid, every of them that
there shall be present come to the Election, shall name nine of the
worthiest and sufficient Knyghtes withoute Reproffe that he shall
knowe, Subjectes to the said Sovereyne, or others, so be that they
holde no contrary Partie or be agaynst hym; that is to witt, three
Dukes, three Marquess, Erles, or of greater Astate, three Barons, or
Banerettis, and three Bachelers; the which denominations the cheiff
Prelate of the said Order shall wryte; that is to witt, the Byshop of
_Wynchester_ for the tyme beyng, or in his absence the Chaunceler, or
the Dean, or Register, or the mooste auncient Residencer of the said
College in their absence, and the denominacion soo done by all, or six
at the leest, by hym that have Written shall be shewed to the said
Soverayne or to his Deputie, that then shall Chose of them that be
named he that shall have the moost Voyces, and also he that the
Soverayne shall exteme to be moost Honorable to the sayde Order, and
moost profitable to his Crowne and to his Realme. And if there be any
Knyght of the said Order that doth fayle for to come to the said
Election, if he be not lett by a juste Cause, and that the said cause
of his Excuse shewed under his Seal of Armes, be founde by the
Soverayne or his Deputie to be juste and reasonable, then his Excuse to
be accepted and allowed; and that if his Cause be not juste, and that
he come not to the Seremonies above-named, it is agreed that he shall
Paye to the Warden of the College for to synge for hym that is
departed, twenty Shillings Sterling; and at his nexte comyng to the
Chapter, he shall not be before the Soverayne or his Deputie and the
Company; and shall knele upon the Grounde in the myddes of the Chapter,
untyll the tyme that he be reconciled by the Soverayne or his Deputie
and the said Companye.

XXI. _Item_, It is agreed, That if any Knyghte of the said Companye
shulde departe, and another is Chosen and Electe, he shall have sone
after his Election the Garter, in signyfyeng that he ys one of the
Knyghtes and Felowes of the Order of the Garter, and his Robe and Hode
shall be delivered hym in the Chapter-House incontinently, after that
his Commission hath been red before the Soverayne or his Deputie and
the Companye, and after that shall be led by two Knyghtes of the said
Order, accompanied with the other Noblemen, and the Officers of the
Order shall also be present, and his Mantell shall be borne before hym
by one of the Knyghtes of the said Order, or by the Kyng at Armes of
the Order. The which Mantell shall be delyvered to hym for his Habit,
after that he shall have made his Oth before his Stalle, and not
before. And this done, he shall retorne into the Chapter-House, where
he shall reseyve, by the Soverayne or his Deputie, the Coler, and soo
he shall have the full Possession of his Habit holely, except great
Prynces Strangers, the which may receyve their Habit holely within the
Chapter-House, as it hath been used and accustomed in tymes paste, for
the shortenyng of tyme. And if he die before he have receyved hys
Habit, he shall not be named one of the Founders, seyng that he lacketh
to have full Possession of his Astate: But he shall have the one halfe
of the Masses above-named for the delyverance of the Garter, and none
other thynge above it. And if he soo Chosen come not in all good
diligence, after the reception of the said Garter in the said Place to
be stalled, and in specyally within the Yere of his Election, if he be
a Knyghte dwellyng within the Realme, and hath none Excuse reasonable,
allowable, and acceptable to the said Soverayne or his Deputie and the
Company; then the Election shall be voyd of hym, and the Soverayne or
his Deputie and the Companye, shall goo and make another new Election,
and neyther the Banner, the Sworde, nor the Helmet, nor Crest, of hym
so Chosen, be put upon his Stalle within the Castell before his
commyng; to the ende that if he come not, his said Hachementes, as
Banner, Sworde, Helmet, be not taken down nor avoled, but honesly put
oute of the Quyer, and the reast of other thyngs shall abyde, to the
profitt and use of the saide Order.

XXII. _Item_, It is agreed, That if any of the Dukes, Marques, Erles,
Vizcontes, Barons, Bandrettis, or Bachelers die; that he that shall
come after and succede in his place and rome, be he Duke, Marquess,
Erle, Vizconte, Baron, Baneret, Bacheler, or any of the Astates
above-named, he shall have the selffe same Stalle his Predecessor had,
and shall not change it, without he have especiall License or Warrant
of the said Soverayne, allwayes all Emperours, Kyngs, and Prynces, be
excepted, the which shall kepe and holde theyr Stalles after theyr
Astate, and very nexte unto the Soverayne; and then by this meane a
Duke shall take the Stalle of a Bacheler, and a Bacheler the Stalle of
a Duke, in signe and knowlege of the fyrst Founders.

XXIII. _Item_, If there be any Place or Stalle voyde, the Soverayne at
his Pleasure may advance and translate, by his special License, any
Knyghte of the said Companye in the said Stalle, so be it that it be
more hyer then the Stalle that he was in afore; also the Soverayne onys
in his Lyffe may, if it please hym, make a general Translation of all
the States at his pleasure, excepte the Emperours, Kyngs, Prynces, and
Dukes; the which allwey shall kepe ther Places and Stalles, if not that
they be translated in more hyer Rome and Stalle, in the which
translacion the long contynuance in the Ordre, and the praises,
worthynes, and Merites of the Knyghtes ought to be considered and
remembred; the which Knyghtes from hensforth in goyng and syttyng at
all tymes, that they shall were their Mantells, shall kepe their Places
after the Order of their Stallis, and not after their Astatis, as is
aforesaid.

XXIV. _Item_, It is agreed, That all the Felowis abovesaid, at their
fyrst commyng in, shall gyve every of them a certayne Somme, after
their Astate, for the entertaynyng and mayntenance of the Cannons and
pore Knyghtes dwellyng in the said Place, and for the Almes Dedes that
is there perpetualli ordenyd; that is to witt, the Soverayne fourty
Markes, a Stranger Kyng twenty Pounds, the Prynce twenty Markes, every
Duke ten Pounds, every Marques eight Pounds six Shillings and eight
Pence, every Erle ten Markes, every Vizconte five Pounds sixteen
Shillings and eight Pence, every Baron and Baneret, five Pounds, every
Bacheler five Markes; and their Baners, Helmetts, Crestis, and Swordis,
shalle not be set over their Stalles untyll the tyme that they have
payd, at their entryng, the foresaid Sommes, every one after his Astate
and Degree whereof he is; and that is to witt, the Soverayne is bounde
to pay for every Stranger that shall be Chosen and electe, when he
shall be stalled in his propre Parson, or by procurement or Attornay,
and these Gyftes be gieven, to the entent that every one of them that
shall entre into the Ordre, be more worthy to have the Name, Title and
Privelege of one of the Founders of the said Ordre.

XXV. _Item_, It ys agreed, That every Knight within the Yere of his
Stallation, shall cause to be made a Scouchon of his Armes and
Hachementis in a Plate of Metall, suche as shall please hym, and that
it be suerly sett upon the back of his Stall; and the other that shall
come after, shall have their Scochons and Hachements in like manner;
but their Plates of Metall nor there Hachements shall not be soo large
nor soo greatte as they of the first Founders were; excepte Strangers,
which may use their Plates and Fashions at their Pleasure.

XXVI. _Item_, It ys agreed, That no Knyght chosen and electe for to be
Felow of the said Noble Ordre, shall not be stalled by Procurement or
Attornay, excepte he be a Straunger, and may not well come hyther in
his propre Parson for to be stalled, or other that is busied withoute
the Realme for the Affaires of the Soverayne, or by his Commandement
and Lycence, as it ys above declared.

XXVII. _Item_, That every Knyght entryng in the said Ordre, shall
Promes and Swere faithfully to observe and kepe the Poyntis and
Articles that here followeth; that is to witt, that to his trew Powre
he shall helpe, duryng his Lyffe, and duryng the tyme that he shall be
Felow of the said Ordre, for to kepe, defende and sustayne the Honor,
Quarrelles, Rightes and Lordshippes of the Soverayne of the said Ordre.

_Item_, That with all his Powre he shall enforce hymselffe and take
payne honorably to entertayne and augment the said Ordre; and if it
happen hym for to know any thynge that were imagyned or procured to the
contrarye, of the defence and resistence of this, with all his trew
Powre he shall put hymself in more gretter endevorment.

_Item_, That well and trewly he shall accomplisshe and entertayne all
the Statutis, Poyntis and Ordynances of the said Ordre; and of all this
shall make a generall Othe, all and so as though it were redde unto hym
fro Poynt to Poynt, and Article to Article, and shall make the said
Othe to the Soverayne of the said Ordre, or his Deputie, in sweryng and
promisyng upon the Holye Gospellis, for to kepe them and entertayne
them withoute any fraude or delacion. And upon this he shall touche the
Boke, and kysse the Crosse.

_Item_, This done, the said Knyght soo Chosen, with due Reverence,
shall receyve the Garter; the whiche the, Soverayne or his Deputye
shall put it aboute his left Leg, in saying these Words: “Sir, The
lovyng Companye of the Ordre of the Garter hath receyved you theyr
Brother, Lover, and Felow; and in token and knowlege of this, they gyve
you and present you this present Garter; the whiche God wyll that you
receyve and were from hensforth to his Praise and Pleasure, and to the
Exaltacion and Honor of the said Noble Order, and of your self.”

XXVIII. _Item_, It is agreed, That in case that the Soverayne be out of
the Contrey, to the whiche he cannot in propre Parson do that shall
appertayne to the Stallation; he may gyve Powre and Auctorite, by his
Letters of Commission, to two of the Felows, or to dyverse, for to
exercise it in his Name.

XXIX. _Item_, It is agreed, That a common Seal, a Signet of the Arms of
the Ordre be made, the which shall rest in the custodi and kepyng of
the Chanceler of the Ordre, or of such a Knyghte and Felow of the said
Ordre as shall please the Soverayne to name and assigne; and if he that
shall have the Seales in kepyng or custodi, shulde departe or goo forth
for any cause twenty Miles farre from the Soverayne, then he shall
deliver the said Seals to the Soverayne, or to such Knyghte of the
Ordre, or to any other Parson that it shall please the said Soverayne
for to ordeyne and appoynte; to the entent that at no tyme the said
Seals be out of the presence of the seid Soverayne, he beyng within his
Realme; and if he be owte of his Realme, the Signet shall suffice for
to Seal all suche Actes and Wrytynges touchyng the said Ordre, that
there may be concluded and made.

XXX. _Item_, It is agreed, That every Felow of the said Ordre, from
hensforth, shall have the Statutis of the said Ordre first collected
and oversene by the Register, and after that sealed with the common
Seal aforesaid: And if the Knyght will have any Armes devysed, or
cognysance made within the Boke of the said Statutes, then the said
Boke shall be delyvered to the Kynge at Armes of the Ordre, for trewly
to ordayne of it as it shall appertayne; and the original to be
likewyse signed and sealed, the whiche shall abyde in the Treasory of
the said College for evermore.

XXXI. _Item_, It is agreed, That after the Death of eny of the Knyghtes
of the said Companye, his Executours shall be bounde for to sende
agayne, and to delyver, the Statutes of the said Ordre within three
Monethes after, if so be that the Statutes hath been delivered unto hym
by the Soverayne, or to his charge; the which Statutes shall be
delivered agayn to the Warden or Register of the said College, or to
one of the principal Officers for the tyme beyng.

XXXII. _Item_, It is agreed, That none of the Knyghtes of Saynt
_George_, of the said Companye of the Garter, shall not goo oute of the
Contrey nor Dominion of the Soverayne, without havyng Leave and Lisence
of the Soverayne; and therefore it is agreed, That if eny Viage be
made, or any other notable Acte, appertaynyng to the Honor of
Knyghthod; the said Soverayne, of his Grace, for the great Love, Favor
and Confidence that he beares towarde the Knyghtes of the said Ordre,
will prefarre, advance and present the said Felowes and Knyghtes of the
Order of Saynt _George_ before all other.

XXXIII. _Item_, That none of the Knyghtes of the said Ordre shall not
Arme themselves the one against the other, but in the Warres of his
Soverayne Lorde, in his right and juste Quarell; and if it shulde
happen that any of the said Ordre were retayned with any Lorde, and
holdyng his Partie and Quarell, and the adversari Partie desireth alsoo
to have another Felowe of the said Ordre with hym; In this case such a
Knyght and Felowe shall not be retayned, but may excuse hym from all
suche thynges, because his Felowe is armed against hym on the other
syde, and was retayned before hym; and every Knyght of the said Ordre
shall be bounde to excepte when he shall be retayned, that he may be
holely dischargyd from his Servyce of Warre, if any of the Felowshipp
before hym retayned or holdyng the contrary and adversari Partye; and
if he that is second retayned, know that any of his Felowes be retayned
before hym, and armed with his adversari Partye; Then he that is
seconde retayned, at the fyrste knowledge that he shall have thereof,
shall be bounde to excuse hym toward his Maister, and leave that
Quarell.

XXXIV. _Item_, That all the Lycencis gyven to the Knyghtes of the said
Ordre that goo oute of the Realme, for to seke and obtayne Honor; and
all Certifications or sendynge Letters and Writynges concernyng the
said Ordre, from hensforth shall be Sealed with one of the Seales of
the said Ordre.

XXXV. _Item_, It is agreed, That if eny Knyght of the said Ordre, for
his Devocion, wyll dwell within the said Castell contynually; there
shall be ordeny’d for hym a dwellyng Place convenient, by the
Assignment of the Soverayne, and he of his propre Goods, and at his
Costes and Charges, shall provyde for hys Lyveyng.

XXXVI. _Item_, If any other Knyght, not beyng of the said Ordre, hathe
any wyll to dwelle there for his Devocion; there shall be ordened for
hym a dwellyng Place, after the Wyll and Pleasure of the said
Soverayne, and with the Consentement of the said Company.

XXXVII. _Item_, It is ordened, That yf any Knyght, or other Parson,
wylle gyve any Landes, Heritage, or Rentes, for to be participant of
all the good Oraysons and Prayers that shall be said in the sayde
Place, also his Name shall be registred, and the Canons and pore
Knyghts shall Pray perpetually unto God for hym; and also the said
Deane, Warden, and Canons of the said College, from hensforth, shall
not take any maner of Charge upon the said College, withoute the Advyse
and Consentement of the sayd Soverayne, or his Deputye, and the
Felowship of the sayd Order, in Presence, and by them concented and
agreed in playne Chapter.

XXXVIII. _Item_, For to have better knowledge of the Knyghtes that
shall be of the said Order, the Soverayne of it willyth and ordeneth,
by the Willes and Consentement of all the hole Company, that from
hensforth, that every Knyght of the said Ordre shall have and were
apertly and openly, a Coller of Golde about his Necke, waying thirty
Ounces of Troy Weyght, and not above, the whiche Coller shall be made
by Pieces in Fashion of Garters, in the myddes of which Garters shall
be a double Rose, the one Rose of Rede, and the other within White, and
the other Rose White, and the other Rose within Rede, and at the ende
of the said Coller shall be put and fastned the Ymage of Saynt
_George_. The whiche Coller, the said Soverayne, his Successours, and
amiable Companye of the said Ordre, shall be bounde to were, and in
especiall in principall and solempne Feasts of the Yere, and in other
Dayes of the Yere shall be holden to were a small Chayne of Gold, with
the Ymage of Saynt _George_ dependyng at the ende of the said Chayne,
excepte in tyme of Warre, Sickeness, long Viage; then it shall suffice
hym to were alonely a Lase of Sylke, with the said Image of St.
_George_; and if the said Coller have any need of reparacion, it might
be put into the Handes of the Goldesmyth and Workeman, unto the tyme
that it be repared; the whiche Coller allso may not be made more richer
with Stones or other thynges, reserving the said Ymage, the which may
be garnished and enryched at the Pleasure of the saide Knyghte: Also
the said Coller may not be solde, engaged, aliened, nor gyven, for any
nede, cause, or necessity whatsoever it be.




       ---------------------------------------------------------

                                _FINIS._




                             THE CONTENTS.


                                CHAP. I.

_Of Knighthood in general, and the several Orders in_ England, &c. page
  1.


                               CHAP. II.

_Of the Religious Orders of Knighthood in Christendom_, &c. page 19.


                               CHAP. III.

_An Account of the Orders of Knighthood absolutely Military._ page 53.


                               CHAP. IV.

_Of the Castle, Chappel, and College of_ Windsor. page 79.


                                CHAP. V.

_The Institution of the most_ Noble Order _of the_ Garter. page 119.


                               CHAP. VI.

_The Statutes and Annals of the Order._ p. 133.


                               CHAP. VII.

_Of the Habits and Ensigns of the most_ Noble Order _of the_ Garter.
  page 156.


                              CHAP. VIII.

_The Officers appointed for the Service of the Order._ page 189.


                               CHAP. IX.

_The Election of a Knight into the Order._ page 225.


                                CHAP. X.

_The Investiture of a Knight Subject, with the Garter and George._ page
  272.


                               CHAP. XI.

_Of Preparations for the personal Installation of a Knight._ page 286.


                               CHAP. XII.

_The personal Installation of a Knight-Subject._ page 315.


                              CHAP. XIII.

_The Installation of a Knight-Subject by Proxy._ page 352.


                               CHAP. XIV.

_The Signification of Elections to Strangers._ page 360.


                               CHAP. XV.

_The Investitures of Strangers with the Habit and Ensigns of the
  Order._ page 367.


                               CHAP. XVI.

_The Installation of a Stranger by Proxy._ p. 384.


                              CHAP. XVII.

_The Duties and Fees payable by the Knights-Companions at their
  Installations._ page 404.


                              CHAP. XVIII.

_Of the Grand Feast of the Order._ page 410.


                               CHAP. XIX.

_Of Preparations for the Grand Feast of the Order._ page 420.


                               CHAP. XX.

_The Order of the Ceremonies on the Eve of the Grand Feast._ page 433.


                               CHAP. XXI.

_The Order of the Ceremonies on the Feast Day._ page 465.


                              CHAP. XXII.

_The Ceremonies observed on the last Day of the Feast._ page 484.


                              CHAP. XXIII.

_The Observation of the Grand Feast by absent Knights._ page 486.


                              CHAP. XXIV.

_The Degradation of a Knight-Companion._ p. 489.


                               CHAP. XXV.

_Honours paid to deceased Knights-Companions._ page 491.


                              CHAP. XXVI.

_A List of the Founders, and Catalogue of their Successors, to the
  present time._ page 501.




                           Transcriber’s Note


This book often uses inconsistent spelling and formatting (decorative
small capitals, italics, etc.). This was left as printed unless noted
below.

Opening quote marks in the printed book were often included at the
beginning of a quote and at the start of each subsequent line of the
paragraph. Closing quote marks were often omitted. In this
representation of the book, the opening quotes following the first were
omitted and a closing quote was added to aid readability.

Some presumed printer’s errors have been corrected, including
normalizing punctuation. Further corrections are listed below.

   p. 6 Patenr -> Patent
   p. 13 ortns -> ortus
   p. 15 _Brune_, in in _Lincolnshire_ -> _Brune_, in _Lincolnshire_
   p. 15 a, -> at
   p. 27 Hospitellers -> Hospitallers
   p. 32 Cisterian -> Cistercian
   p. 39 Beast -> Breast
   p. 61 Portaiture -> Portraiture
   p. 112 4 _l._ 2 _d._ 8 _d._ -> 4 _l._ 2 _s._ 8 _d._
   p. 113 _l._ 12. 9 _d._  -> _l._ 12 _s._ 9 _d._
   p. 173 among the the Romans -> among the Romans
   p. 188 Cold Chain -> Gold Chain
   p. 189 obious -> obvious
   p. 201 exhibied -> exhibited
   p. 218 37 _l._ 13 _s._ 10 _s._  -> 37 _l._ 13 _s._ 10 _d._
   p. 244 Execuing -> Executing
   p. 247 mannner -> manner
   p. 248 Fengo -> Fengs (one instance)
   p. 250 _Eliz._ IV. -> _Edw._ IV.
   p. 273 Year of of our Reign -> Year of our Reign
   p. 393 Christan -> Christian
   p. 419 annna -> annua
   p. 429 Flanders, Flanders -> Flanders
   p. 475 there moving -> the removing
   p. 478 twenty fith -> twenty fifth
   p. 501 Chapter heading added according to the Table of Contents
   p. 516 mngland -> England
   p. 546 hmuble -> humble
   p. 548 Even Soog -> Even Song
   p. 548 Saynt _Geooge_ -> Saynt _George_
   p. 555 for they they should -> for they
   p. 562 gvye -> gyve





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the Most Noble Order of
the Garter, by Unknown

